1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the scope of physics.
• Calculate the order of magnitude of a quantity.
• Compare measurable length, mass, and timescales quantitatively.
• Describe the relationships among models, theories, and laws.
Physics is devoted to the understanding of all natural phenomena. In physics, we try to understand physical
phenomena at all scales—from the world of subatomic particles to the entire universe. Despite the breadth of the
subject, the various subfields of physics share a common core. The same basic training in physics will prepare you to
work in any area of physics and the related areas of science and engineering. In this section, we investigate the
scope of physics; the scales of length, mass, and time over which the laws of physics have been shown to be
applicable; and the process by which science in general, and physics in particular, operates.
The Scope of Physics
Take another look at the chapter-opening image. The Whirlpool Galaxy contains billions of individual stars as well as
huge clouds of gas and dust. Its companion galaxy is also visible to the right. This pair of galaxies lies a staggering
billion trillion miles from our own galaxy (which is called the Milky W a y). The stars and planets that
make up the Whirlpool Galaxy might seem to be the furthest thing from most people’s everyday lives, but the
Whirlpool is a great starting point to think about the forces that hold the universe together. The forces that cause the
Whirlpool Galaxy to act as it does are thought to be the same forces we contend with here on Earth, whether we are
planning to send a rocket into space or simply planning to raise the walls for a new home. The gravity that causes
the stars of the Whirlpool Galaxy to rotate and revolve is thought to be the same as what causes water to flow over
hydroelectric dams here on Earth. When you look up at the stars, realize the forces out there are the same as the
ones here on Earth. Through a study of physics, you may gain a greater understanding of the interconnectedness of
everything we can see and know in this universe.
Humans have created and manufactured millions of different objects. Successive technological periods (often
referred to as the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age, and so on) are marked by knowledge of the physical
properties of certain materials and the ability to manipulate them. This knowledge all stems from physics, whether
it's the way a rock would flake when constructing a spear point, the effect of integrating carbon with iron in South
Indian and Sri Lankan furnaces to create the earliest high-quality steel, or the proper way to combine perfectly
ground and polished pieces of glass to create optical instruments. Our current technological age, the Information
Age, can be traced to critical innovations made by people from all backgrounds working together. Mohamed M.
Atalla and Dawon Kahng, for example, invented the MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor).
Although unknown to most people, this tiny device, created in 1959 by an Egyptian-born scientist and a Korean-
born scientist working in a lab in New Jersey (U.S.), is the basis for modern electronics. More MOSFETs have been
produced than any other object in human history. They are used in computers, smartphones, microwave ovens,
automotive controls, medical instruments, and nearly every other electronic device.
Next, think about the most exciting modern technologies that you have heard about in the news, such as trains that
levitate above tracks, “invisibility cloaks” that bend light around them, and microscopic robots that fight cancer cells
in our bodies. All these groundbreaking advances, commonplace or unbelievable, rely on the principles of physics.
Aside from playing a significant role in technology, professionals such as engineers, pilots, physicians, physical
therapists, electricians, and computer programmers apply physics concepts in their daily work. For example, a pilot
must understand how wind forces affect a flight path; a physical therapist must understand how the muscles in the
body experience forces as they move and bend. As you will learn in this text, the principles of physics are propelling
new, exciting technologies, and these principles are applied in a wide range of careers.
The underlying order of nature makes science in general, and physics in particular, interesting and enjoyable to
study. For example, what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in common? Both contain energy that can be
converted to other forms. The law of conservation of energy (which says that energy can change form but is never
lost) ties together such topics as food calories, batteries, heat, light, and watch springs. Understanding this law
Access for free at openstax.org
1.1 • The Scope and Scale of Physics 7
makes it easier to learn about the various forms energy takes and how they relate to one another. Apparently
unrelated topics are connected through broadly applicable physical laws, permitting an understanding beyond just
the memorization of lists of facts.
Science consists of theories and laws that are the general truths of nature, as well as the body of knowledge they
encompass. Scientists are continuously trying to expand this body of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the
laws that describe it. Physics, which comes from the Greek phúsis, meaning “nature,” is concerned with describing
the interactions of energy, matter, space, and time to uncover the fundamental mechanisms that underlie every
phenomenon. This concern for describing the basic phenomena in nature essentially defines the scope of ph ysics.
Physics aims to understand the world around us at the most basic level. It emphasizes the use of a small number of
quantitative laws to do this, which can be useful to other fields pushing the performance boundaries of existing
technologies. Consider a smartphone (Figure 1.2). Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various
circuits inside the device. This knowledge helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when
building a smartphone. Knowledge of the physics underlying these devices is required to shrink their size or increase
their processing speed. Or, think about a GPS. Physics describes the relationship between the speed of an object,
the distance over which it travels, and the time it takes to travel that distance. GPS relies on precise calculations that
account for variations in the Earth's landscapes, the exact distance between orbiting satellites, and even the effect
of a complex occurrence of time dilation. Most of these calculations are founded on algorithms developed by Gladys
West, a mathematician and computer scientist who programmed the first computers capable of highly accurate
remote sensing and positioning. When you use a GPS device, it utilizes these algorithms to recognize where you are
and how your position relates to other objects on Earth.
FIGURE 1.2 The Apple iPhone is a common smartphone with a GPS function. Physics describes the way that electricity flows through the
circuits of this device. Engineers use their knowledge of physics to construct an iPhone with features that consumers will enjoy. One
specific feature of an iPhone is the GPS function. A GPS uses physics equations to determine the drive time between two locations on a
map. (credit: Jane Whitney)
Knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as well as in nonscientific professions. It can help you
understand how microwave ovens work, why metals should not be put into them, and why they might affect
pacemakers. Physics allows you to understand the hazards of radiation and to evaluate these hazards rationally and
more easily. Physics also explains the reason why a black car radiator helps remove heat in a car engine, and it
explains why a white roof helps keep the inside of a house cool. Similarly, the operation of a car’s ignition system as
well as the transmission of electrical signals throughout our body’s nervous system are much easier to understand
when you think about them in terms of basic physics.
Physics is a key element of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others. Chemistry, for
8 1 • Units and Measurement
example—since it deals with the interactions of atoms and molecules—has close ties to atomic and molecular
physics. Most branches of engineering are concerned with designing new technologies, processes, or structures
within the constraints set by the laws of physics. In architecture, physics is at the heart of structural stability and is
involved in the acoustics, heating, lighting, and cooling of buildings. Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such as
radioactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, and heat transfer within Earth. Some disciplines, such as
biophysics and geophysics, are hybrids of physics and other disciplines.
Physics has many applications in the biological sciences. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the properties
of cells and their environments. On the macroscopic level, it explains the heat, work, and power associated with the
human body and its various organ systems. Physics is involved in medical diagnostics, such as radiographs,
magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasonic blood flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes involves
physics directly; for example, cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation. Physics also explains sensory
phenomena, such as how musical instruments make sound, how the eye detects color, and how lasers transmit
information.
It is not necessary to study all applications of physics formally. What is most useful is knowing the basic laws of
physics and developing skills in the analytical methods for applying them. The study of physics also can improve
your problem-solving skills. Furthermore, physics retains the most basic aspects of science, so it is used by all the
sciences, and the study of physics makes other sciences easier to understand.
The Scale of Physics
From the discussion so far, it should be clear that to accomplish your goals in any of the various fields within the
natural sciences and engineering, a thorough grounding in the laws of physics is necessary. The reason for this is
simply that the laws of physics govern everything in the observable universe at all measurable scales of length,
mass, and time. Now, that is easy enough to say, but to come to grips with what it really means, we need to get a
little bit quantitative. So, before surveying the various scales that physics allows us to explore, let’s first look at the
concept of “order of magnitude,” which we use to come to terms with the vast ranges of length, mass, and time that
we consider in this text (Figure 1.3).
FIGURE 1.3 (a) Using a scanning tunneling microscope, scientists can see the individual atoms (diameters around 10–10 m) that compose
this sheet of gold. (b) Tiny phytoplankton swim among crystals of ice in the Antarctic Sea. They range from a few micrometers (1 μ m is 10–6
m) to as much as 2 mm (1 mm is 10–3 m) in length. (c) These two colliding galaxies, known as NGC 4676A (right) and NGC 4676B (left), are
nicknamed “The Mice” because of the tail of gas emanating from each one. They are located 300 million light-years from Earth in the
constellation Coma Berenices. Eventually, these two galaxies will merge into one. (credit a: modification of work by
"Erwinrossen"/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook University; NOAA Corps
Collections; credit c: modification of work by NASA, H. Ford (JHU), G. Illingworth (UCSC/LO), M. Clampin (STScI), G. Hartig (STScI), the ACS
Science Team, and ESA)
Order of magnitude
The order of magnitude of a number is the power of 10 that most closely approximates it. Thus, the order of
magnitude refers to the scale (or size) of a value. Each power of 10 represents a different order of magnitude. For
example, and so forth, are all different orders of magnitude, as are and
To find the order of magnitude of a number, take the base-10 logarithm of the number and round it to the nearest
integer, then the order of magnitude of the number is simply the resulting power of 10. For example, the order of
magnitude of 800 is 103 because which rounds to 3. Similarly, the order of magnitude of 450 is
Access for free at openstax.org
1.1 • The Scope and Scale of Physics 9
103 because to 2.
which rounds to 3 as well. Thus, we say the numbers 800 and 450 are of the same
order of magnitude: 103. However, the order of magnitude of 250 is 102 because which rounds
An equivalent but quicker way to find the order of magnitude of a number is first to write it in scientific notation and
then check to see whether the first factor is greater than or less than The idea is that
is halfway between and on a log base-10 scale. Thus, if the first factor is less than
then we round it down to 1 and the order of magnitude is simply whatever power of 10 is required to write the
number in scientific notation. On the other hand, if the first factor is greater than then we round it up to 10 and
the order of magnitude is one power of 10 higher than the power needed to write the number in scientific notation.
For example, the number 800 can be written in scientific notation as Because 8 is bigger than
we say the order of magnitude of 800 is The number 450 can be written as magnitude is also 103 because 4.5 is greater than 3. However, 250 written in scientific notation is so its order of
and
2.5 is less than 3, so its order of magnitude is
The order of magnitude of a number is designed to be a ballpark estimate for the scale (or size) of its value. It is
simply a way of rounding numbers consistently to the nearest (on a logarithmic scale) power of 10. In other words, if
numbers differ by one order of magnitude, the one is larger than the other by about ten. This makes doing rough
mental math with very big and very small numbers easier. For example, the diameter of a hydrogen atom is on the
order of 10−10 m, whereas the diameter of the Sun is on the order of 109 m, so it would take roughly
hydrogen atoms to stretch across the diameter of the Sun. This is much easier to do in your head
than using the more precise values of for a hydrogen atom diameter and for the
Sun’s diameter, to find that it would take hydrogen atoms to stretch across the Sun’s diameter. In
addition to being easier, the rough estimate is also nearly as informative as the precise calculation.
Known ranges of length, mass, and time
The vastness of the universe and the breadth over which physics applies are illustrated by the wide range of
examples of known lengths, masses, and times (given as orders of magnitude) in Figure 1.4. Examining this table
will give you a feeling for the range of possible topics in physics and numerical values. A good way to appreciate the
vastness of the ranges of values in Figure 1.4 is to try to answer some simple comparative questions, such as the
following:
• How many hydrogen atoms does it take to stretch across the diameter of the Sun?
(Answer: 109 m/10–10 m = 1019 hydrogen atoms)
• How many protons are there in a bacterium?
(Answer: 10–15 kg/10–27 kg = 1012 protons)
• How many floating-point operations can a supercomputer do in 1 day?
(Answer: 105 s/10–17 s = 1022 floating-point operations)
In studying Figure 1.4, take some time to come up with similar questions that interest you and then try answering
them. Doing this can breathe some life into almost any table of numbers.
10 1 • Units and Measurement
FIGURE 1.4 This table shows the orders of magnitude of length, mass, and time.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21scaleuniv) to explore interactively the vast range of length scales in our
universe. Scroll down and up the scale to view hundreds of organisms and objects, and click on the individual
objects to learn more about each one.
Building Models
How did we come to know the laws governing natural phenomena? What we refer to as the laws of nature are
concise descriptions of the universe around us. They are human statements of the underlying laws or rules that all
natural processes follow. Such laws are intrinsic to the universe; humans did not create them and cannot change
them. We can only discover and understand them. Their discovery is a very human endeavor, with all the elements
of mystery, imagination, struggle, triumph, and disappointment inherent in any creative effort (Figure 1.5). The
cornerstone of discovering natural laws is observation; scientists must describe the universe as it is, not as we
imagine it to be.
Access for free at openstax.org
1.1 • The Scope and Scale of Physics 11
FIGURE 1.5 (a) Enrico Fermi (1901–1954) was born in Italy. On accepting the Nobel Prize in Stockholm in 1938 for his work on artificial
radioactivity produced by neutrons, he took his family to America rather than return home to the government in power at the time. He
became an American citizen and was a leading participant in the Manhattan Project. (b) Marie Curie (1867–1934) sacrificed monetary
assets to help finance her early research and damaged her physical well-being with radiation exposure. She is the only person to win Nobel
prizes in both physics and chemistry. One of her daughters also won a Nobel Prize. (credit a: modification of work by United States
Department of Energy)
A model is a representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly. Although a
model is justified by experimental tests, it is only accurate in describing certain aspects of a physical system. An
example is the Bohr model of single-electron atoms, in which the electron is pictured as orbiting the nucleus,
analogous to the way planets orbit the Sun (Figure 1.6). We cannot observe electron orbits directly, but the mental
image helps explain some of the observations we can make, such as the emission of light from hot gases (atomic
spectra). However, other observations show that the picture in the Bohr model is not really what atoms look like.
The model is “wrong,” but is still useful for some purposes. Physicists use models for a variety of purposes. For
example, models can help physicists analyze a scenario and perform a calculation or models can be used to
represent a situation in the form of a computer simulation. Ultimately, however, the results of these calculations and
simulations need to be double-checked by other means—namely, observation and experimentation.
FIGURE 1.6 What is a model? The Bohr model of a single-electron atom shows the electron orbiting the nucleus in one of several possible
circular orbits. Like all models, it captures some, but not all, aspects of the physical system.
The word theor y means something different to scientists than what is often meant when the word is used in
everyday conversation. In particular, to a scientist a theory is not the same as a “guess” or an “idea” or even a
“hypothesis.” The phrase “it’s just a theory” seems meaningless and silly to scientists because science is founded
on the notion of theories. To a scientist, a theory is a testable explanation for patterns in nature supported by
scientific evidence and verified multiple times by various groups of researchers. Some theories include models to
12 1 • Units and Measurement
help visualize phenomena whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of gravity, for example, does not require a model
or mental image, because we can observe the objects directly with our own senses. Although models are meant only
to describe certain aspects of a physical system accurately, a theory should describe all aspects of any system that
falls within its domain of applicability. In particular, any experimentally testable implication of a theory should be
verified. If an experiment ever shows an implication of a theory to be false, then the theory is either thrown out or
modified suitably (for example, by limiting its domain of applicability).
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature supported by scientific evidence and
repeated experiments. Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical equation. Laws and
theories are similar in that they are both scientific statements that result from a tested hypothesis and are
supported by scientific evidence. However, the designation law is usually reserved for a concise and very general
statement that describes phenomena in nature, such as the law that energy is conserved during any process, or
Newton’s second law of motion, which relates force (F ), mass (m), and acceleration (a) by the simple equation
A theory, in contrast, is a less concise statement of observed behavior. For example, the theory of evolution
and the theory of relativity cannot be expressed concisely enough to be considered laws. The biggest difference
between a law and a theory is that a theory is much more complex and dynamic. A law describes a single action
whereas a theory explains an entire group of related phenomena. Less broadly applicable statements are usually
called principles (such as Pascal’s principle, which is applicable only in fluids), but the distinction between laws and
principles often is not made carefully.
The models, theories, and laws we devise sometimes imply the existence of objects or phenomena that are as yet
unobserved. These predictions are remarkable triumphs and tributes to the power of science. It is the underlying
order in the universe that enables scientists to make such spectacular predictions. However, if experimentation
does not verify our predictions, then the theory or law is wrong, no matter how elegant or convenient it is. Laws can
never be known with absolute certainty because it is impossible to perform every imaginable experiment to confirm
a law for every possible scenario. Physicists operate under the assumption that all scientific laws and theories are
valid until a counterexample is observed. If a good-quality, verifiable experiment contradicts a well-established law
or theory, then the law or theory must be modified or overthrown completely.
The study of science in general, and physics in particular, is an adventure much like the exploration of an uncharted
ocean. Discoveries are made; models, theories, and laws are formulated; and the beauty of the physical universe is
made more sublime for the insights gained.
1.2 Units and Standards
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how SI base units are defined.
• Describe how derived units are created from base units.
• Express quantities given in SI units using metric prefixes.
As we saw previously, the range of objects and phenomena studied in physics is immense. From the incredibly short
lifetime of a nucleus to the age of Earth, from the tiny sizes of subnuclear particles to the vast distance to the edges
of the known universe, from the force exerted by a jumping flea to the force between Earth and the Sun, there are
enough factors of 10 to challenge the imagination of even the most experienced scientist. Giving numerical values
for physical quantities and equations for physical principles allows us to understand nature much more deeply than
qualitative descriptions alone. To comprehend these vast ranges, we must also have accepted units in which to
express them. We shall find that even in the potentially mundane discussion of meters, kilograms, and seconds, a
profound simplicity of nature appears: all physical quantities can be expressed as combinations of only seven base
physical units.
We define a physical quantity either by specifying how it is measured or by stating how it is calculated from other
measurements. For example, we might define distance and time by specifying methods for measuring them, such as
using a meter stick and a stopwatch. Then, we could define averag e speedby stating that it is calculated as the total
distance traveled divided by time of travel.
Measurements of physical quantities are expressed in terms of units, which are standardized values. For example,
Access for free at openstax.org
1.2 • Units and Standards 13
the length of a race, which is a physical quantity, can be expressed in units of meters (for sprinters) or kilometers
(for distance runners). Without standardized units, it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and
compare measured values in a meaningful way (Figure 1.7).
FIGURE 1.7 Distances given in unknown units are maddeningly useless.
Two major systems of units are used in the world: SI units (for the French Syst ème Int ernational d’Unit és), also
known as the metric s yst em, and English units (also known as the cust omar y or imperial s yst em). English units
were historically used in nations once ruled by the British Empire and are still widely used in the United States.
English units may also be referred to as the f oot–pound–second(fps) system, as opposed to the
centimet er–gram–second(cgs) system. You may also encounter the term SAE units, named after the Society of
Automotive Engineers. Products such as fasteners and automotive tools (for example, wrenches) that are measured
in inches rather than metric units are referred to as SAE fast eners or SAE wrenches.
Virtually every other country in the world (except the United States) now uses SI units as the standard. The metric
system is also the standard system agreed on by scientists and mathematicians.
SI Units: Base and Derived Units
In any system of units, the units for some physical quantities must be defined through a measurement process.
These are called the base quantities for that system and their units are the system’s base units. All other physical
quantities can then be expressed as algebraic combinations of the base quantities. Each of these physical quantities
is then known as a derived quantity and each unit is called a derived unit. The choice of base quantities is
somewhat arbitrary, as long as they are independent of each other and all other quantities can be derived from
them. Typically, the goal is to choose physical quantities that can be measured accurately to a high precision as the
base quantities. The reason for this is simple. Since the derived units can be expressed as algebraic combinations of
the base units, they can only be as accurate and precise as the base units from which they are derived.
Based on such considerations, the International Standards Organization recommends using seven base quantities,
which form the International System of Quantities (ISQ). These are the base quantities used to define the SI base
units. Table 1.1 lists these seven ISQ base quantities and the corresponding SI base units.
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Length meter (m)
Mass kilogram (kg)
Time second (s)
Electrical current ampere (A)
TABLE 1.1 ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units
14 1 • Units and Measurement
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Thermodynamic temperature kelvin (K)
Amount of substance mole (mol)
Luminous intensity candela (cd)
TABLE 1.1 ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units
You are probably already familiar with some derived quantities that can be formed from the base quantities in Table
1.1. For example, the geometric concept of area is always calculated as the product of two lengths. Thus, area is a
derived quantity that can be expressed in terms of SI base units using square meters Similarly,
volume is a derived quantity that can be expressed in cubic meters Speed is length per time; so in terms of SI
base units, we could measure it in meters per second (m/s). Volume mass density (or just density) is mass per
volume, which is expressed in terms of SI base units such as kilograms per cubic meter (kg/m3). Angles can also be
thought of as derived quantities because they can be defined as the ratio of the arc length subtended by two radii of
a circle to the radius of the circle. This is how the radian is defined. Depending on your background and interests,
you may be able to come up with other derived quantities, such as the mass flow rate (kg/s) or volume flow rate
(m3/s) of a fluid, electric charge mass flux density and so on. We will see many more examples
throughout this text. For now, the point is that every physical quantity can be derived from the seven base quantities
in Table 1.1, and the units of every physical quantity can be derived from the seven SI base units.
For the most part, we use SI units in this text. Non-SI units are used in a few applications in which they are in very
common use, such as the measurement of temperature in degrees Celsius the measurement of fluid volume in
liters (L), and the measurement of energies of elementary particles in electron-volts (eV). Whenever non-SI units are
discussed, they are tied to SI units through conversions. For example, 1 L is
INTERACTIVE
Check out a comprehensive source of information on SI units (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21SIUnits) at the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty.
Units of Time, Length, and Mass: The Second, Meter, and Kilogram
The initial chapters in this textbook are concerned with mechanics, fluids, and waves. In these subjects all pertinent
physical quantities can be expressed in terms of the base units of length, mass, and time. Therefore, we now turn to
a discussion of these three base units, leaving discussion of the others until they are needed later.
The second
The SI unit for time, the second (abbreviated s), has a long history. For many years it was defined as 1/86,400 of a
mean solar day. More recently, a new standard was adopted to gain greater accuracy and to define the second in
terms of a nonvarying or constant physical phenomenon (because the solar day is getting longer as a result of the
very gradual slowing of Earth’s rotation). Cesium atoms can be made to vibrate in a very steady way, and these
vibrations can be readily observed and counted. In 1967, the second was redefined as the time required for
9,192,631,770 of these vibrations to occur (Figure 1.8). Note that this may seem like more precision than you would
ever need, but it isn’t—GPSs rely on the precision of atomic clocks to be able to give you turn-by-turn directions on
the surface of Earth, far from the satellites broadcasting their location.
Access for free at openstax.org
1.2 • Units and Standards 15
FIGURE 1.8 An atomic clock such as this one uses the vibrations of cesium atoms to keep time to a precision of better than a microsecond
per year. The fundamental unit of time, the second, is based on such clocks. This image looks down from the top of an atomic fountain
nearly 30 feet tall. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
The meter
The SI unit for length is the meter (abbreviated m); its definition has also changed over time to become more
precise. The meter was first defined in 1791 as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the equator to the North Pole.
This measurement was improved in 1889 by redefining the meter to be the distance between two engraved lines on
a platinum–iridium bar now kept near Paris. By 1960, it had become possible to define the meter even more
accurately in terms of the wavelength of light, so it was again redefined as 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of orange light
emitted by krypton atoms. In 1983, the meter was given its current definition (in part for greater accuracy) as the
distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second (Figure 1.9). This change came after knowing the
speed of light to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s.
FIGURE 1.9 The meter is defined to be the distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second in a vacuum. Distance traveled is speed
multiplied by time.
The kilogram
The SI unit for mass is the kilogram (abbreviated kg); From 1795–2018 it was defined to be the mass of a
platinum–iridium cylinder kept with the old meter standard at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures
near Paris. However, this cylinder has lost roughly 50 micrograms since it was created. Because this is the standard,
this has shifted how we defined a kilogram. Therefore, a new definition was adopted in May 2019 based on the
Planck constant and other constants which will never change in value. We will study Planck’s constant in quantum
mechanics, which is an area of physics that describes how the smallest pieces of the universe work. The kilogram is
measured on a Kibble balance (see Figure 1.10). When a weight is placed on a Kibble balance, an electrical current
is produced that is proportional to Planck’s constant. Since Planck’s constant is defined, the exact current
measurements in the balance define the kilogram.
16 1 • Units and Measurement
FIGURE 1.10 Redefining the SI unit of mass. The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology’s Kibble balance is a machine that
balances the weight of a test mass with the resulting electrical current needed for a force to balance it.
Metric Prefixes
SI units are part of the metric system, which is convenient for scientific and engineering calculations because the
units are categorized by factors of 10. Table 1.2 lists the metric prefixes and symbols used to denote various factors
of 10 in SI units. For example, a centimeter is one-hundredth of a meter (in symbols, 1 cm = 10–2 m) and a
kilometer is a thousand meters (1 km = 103 m). Similarly, a megagram is a million grams (1 Mg = 106 g), a
nanosecond is a billionth of a second (1 ns = 10–9 s), and a terameter is a trillion meters (1 Tm = 1012 m).
Prefix Symbol Meaning Prefix Symbol Meaning
yotta- Y 1024 yocto- y 10–24
zetta- Z 1021 zepto- z 10–21
exa- E 1018 atto- a 10–18
peta- P 1015 femto- f 10–15
tera- T 1012 pico- p 10–12
giga- G 109 nano- n 10–9
mega- M 106 micro- 10–6
kilo- k 103 milli- m 10–3
hecto- h 102 centi- c 10–2
deka- da 101 deci- d 10–1
TABLE 1.2 Metric Prefixes for Powers of 10 and Their Symbols
The only rule when using metric prefixes is that you cannot “double them up.” For example, if you have
Access for free at openstax.org
1.2 • Units and Standards 17
measurements in petameters (1 Pm = 1015 m), it is not proper to talk about megagigameters, although
In practice, the only time this becomes a bit confusing is when discussing masses. As we have
seen, the base SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg), but metric prefixes need to be applied to the gram (g), because
we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes. Thus, a thousand kilograms (103 kg) is written as a megagram (1 Mg)
since
Incidentally, 103 kg is also called a metric t on, abbreviated t. This is one of the units outside the SI system
considered acceptable for use with SI units.
As we see in the next section, metric systems have the advantage that conversions of units involve only powers of
10. There are 100 cm in 1 m, 1000 m in 1 km, and so on. In nonmetric systems, such as the English system of units,
the relationships are not as simple—there are 12 in. in 1 ft, 5280 ft in 1 mi, and so on.
Another advantage of metric systems is that the same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of values simply
by scaling it with an appropriate metric prefix. The prefix is chosen by the order of magnitude of physical quantities
commonly found in the task at hand. For example, distances in meters are suitable in construction, whereas
distances in kilometers are appropriate for air travel, and nanometers are convenient in optical design. With the
metric system there is no need to invent new units for particular applications. Instead, we rescale the units with
which we are already familiar.
EXAMPLE 1.1
using a metric prefix such that the resulting numerical value is bigger than one but
Using Metric Prefixes
Restate the mass less than 1000.
Strategy
Since we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes, we first need to restate the mass in grams by replacing the prefix
symbol k with a factor of 103 (see Table 1.2). Then, we should see which two prefixes in Table 1.2 are closest to the
resulting power of 10 when the number is written in scientific notation. We use whichever of these two prefixes
gives us a number between one and 1000.
Solution
Replacing the k in kilogram with a factor of 103, we find that
From Table 1.2, we see that 1016 is between “peta-” (1015) and “exa-” (1018). If we use the “peta-” prefix, then we
find that since Alternatively, if we use the “exa-” prefix we find that
since Because the problem asks for the numerical value
between one and 1000, we use the “peta-” prefix and the answer is 19.3 Pg.
Significance
It is easy to make silly arithmetic errors when switching from one prefix to another, so it is always a good idea to
check that our final answer matches the number we started with. An easy way to do this is to put both numbers in
scientific notation and count powers of 10, including the ones hidden in prefixes. If we did not make a mistake, the
powers of 10 should match up. In this problem, we started with so we have 13 + 3 = 16 powers of
10. Our final answer in scientific notation is Pg, so we have 1 + 15 = 16 powers of 10. So, everything
checks out.
If this mass arose from a calculation, we would also want to check to determine whether a mass this large makes
any sense in the context of the problem. For this, Figure 1.4 might be helpful.
18 1 • Units and Measurement
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.1
Restate using a metric prefix such that the resulting number is bigger than one but less than 1000.
1.3 Unit Conversion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use conversion factors to express the value of a given quantity in different units.
It is often necessary to convert from one unit to another. For example, if you are reading a European cookbook,
some quantities may be expressed in units of liters and you need to convert them to cups. Or perhaps you are
reading walking directions from one location to another and you are interested in how many miles you will be
walking. In this case, you may need to convert units of feet or meters to miles.
Let’s consider a simple example of how to convert units. Suppose we want to convert 80 m to kilometers. The first
thing to do is to list the units you have and the units to which you want to convert. In this case, we have units in
met ers and we want to convert to kilomet ers. Next, we need to determine a conversion factor relating meters to
kilometers. A conversion factor is a ratio that expresses how many of one unit are equal to another unit. For
example, there are 12 in. in 1 ft, 1609 m in 1 mi, 100 cm in 1 m, 60 s in 1 min, and so on. Refer to Appendix B for a
more complete list of conversion factors. In this case, we know that there are 1000 m in 1 km. Now we can set up
our unit conversion. We write the units we have and then multiply them by the conversion factor so the units cancel
out, as shown:
Note that the unwanted meter unit cancels, leaving only the desired kilometer unit. You can use this method to
convert between any type of unit. Now, the conversion of 80 m to kilometers is simply the use of a metric prefix, as
we saw in the preceding section, so we can get the same answer just as easily by noting that
since “kilo-” means 103 (see Table 1.2) and However, using conversion factors is handy when
converting between units that are not metric or when converting between derived units, as the following examples
illustrate.
EXAMPLE 1.2
Converting Nonmetric Units to Metric
The distance from the university to home is 10 mi and it usually takes 20 min to drive this distance. Calculate the
average speed in meters per second (m/s). (Not e: Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel.)
Strategy
First we calculate the average speed using the given units, then we can get the average speed into the desired units
by picking the correct conversion factors and multiplying by them. The correct conversion factors are those that
cancel the unwanted units and leave the desired units in their place. In this case, we want to convert miles to
meters, so we need to know the fact that there are 1609 m in 1 mi. We also want to convert minutes to seconds, so
we use the conversion of 60 s in 1 min.
Solution
1. Calculate average speed. Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel. (Take this definition as a
given for now. Average speed and other motion concepts are covered in later chapters.) In equation form,
Access for free at openstax.org
1.3 • Unit Conversion 19
2. Substitute the given values for distance and time:
3. Convert miles per minute to meters per second by multiplying by the conversion factor that cancels miles and
leave meters, and also by the conversion factor that cancels minutes and leave seconds:
Significance
Check the answer in the following ways:
1. 2. Be sure the units in the unit conversion cancel correctly. If the unit conversion factor was written upside down,
the units do not cancel correctly in the equation. We see the “miles” in the numerator in 0.50 mi/min cancels
the “mile” in the denominator in the first conversion factor. Also, the “min” in the denominator in 0.50 mi/min
cancels the “min” in the numerator in the second conversion factor.
Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked us to solve for average speed
in units of meters per second and, after the cancellations, the only units left are a meter (m) in the numerator
and a second (s) in the denominator, so we have indeed obtained these units.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.2
Light travels about 9 Pm in a year. Given that a year is about second?
what is the speed of light in meters per
EXAMPLE 1.3
Converting between Metric Units
The density of iron is under standard conditions. Convert this to kg/m3
.
Strategy
We need to convert grams to kilograms and cubic centimeters to cubic meters. The conversion factors we need are
and However, we are dealing with cubic centimeters so we
have to use the second conversion factor three times (that is, we need to cube it). The idea is still to multiply by the
conversion factors in such a way that they cancel the units we want to get rid of and introduce the units we want to
keep.
Solution
Significance
Remember, it’s always important to check the answer.
1. 2. Be sure to cancel the units in the unit conversion correctly. We see that the gram (“g”) in the numerator in 7.86
g/cm3 cancels the “g” in the denominator in the first conversion factor. Also, the three factors of “cm” in the
denominator in 7.86 g/cm3 cancel with the three factors of “cm” in the numerator that we get by cubing the
second conversion factor.
Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked for us to convert to kilograms
per cubic meter. After the cancellations just described, we see the only units we have left are “kg” in the
numerator and three factors of “m” in the denominator (that is, one factor of “m” cubed, or “m3”). Therefore,
the units on the final answer are correct.
20 1 • Units and Measurement
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.3
We know from Figure 1.4 that the diameter of Earth is on the order of 107 m, so the order of magnitude of its surface
area is 1014 m2. What is that in square kilometers (that is, km2)? (Try doing this both by converting 107 m to km and
then squaring it and then by converting 1014 m2 directly to square kilometers. You should get the same answer both
ways.)
Unit conversions may not seem very interesting, but not doing them can be costly. One famous example of this
situation was seen with the Mars Climat e Orbit er. This probe was launched by NASA on December 11, 1998. On
September 23, 1999, while attempting to guide the probe into its planned orbit around Mars, NASA lost contact with
it. Subsequent investigations showed a piece of software called SM_FORCES (or “small forces”) was recording
thruster performance data in the English units of pound-force-seconds (lbf-s). However, other pieces of software
that used these values for course corrections expected them to be recorded in the SI units of newton-seconds (N-s),
as dictated in the software interface protocols. This error caused the probe to follow a very different trajectory from
what NASA thought it was following, which most likely caused the probe either to burn up in the Martian atmosphere
or to shoot out into space. This failure to pay attention to unit conversions cost hundreds of millions of dollars, not to
mention all the time invested by the scientists and engineers who worked on the project.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.4
Given that 1 lbf (pound-force) is 4.45 N, were the numbers being output by SM_FORCES too big or too small?
1.4 Dimensional Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Find the dimensions of a mathematical expression involving physical quantities.
• Determine whether an equation involving physical quantities is dimensionally consistent.
The dimension of any physical quantity expresses its dependence on the base quantities as a product of symbols
(or powers of symbols) representing the base quantities. Table 1.3 lists the base quantities and the symbols used
for their dimension. For example, a measurement of length is said to have dimension L or L1, a measurement of
mass has dimension M or M1, and a measurement of time has dimension T or T1. Like units, dimensions obey the
rules of algebra. Thus, area is the product of two lengths and so has dimension L2, or length squared. Similarly,
volume is the product of three lengths and has dimension L3, or length cubed. Speed has dimension length over
time, L/T or LT–1. Volumetric mass density has dimension M/L3 or ML–3, or mass over length cubed. In general, the
dimension of any physical quantity can be written as for some powers and g. We
can write the dimensions of a length in this form with and the remaining six powers all set equal to zero:
Any quantity with a dimension that can be written so that all seven powers are zero (that
is, its dimension is ) is called dimensionless (or sometimes “of dimension 1,” because anything
raised to the zero power is one). Physicists often call dimensionless quantities pure numbers.
Base Quantity Symbol for Dimension
Length L
Mass M
Time T
Current I
TABLE 1.3 Base Quantities and Their Dimensions
Access for free at openstax.org
1.4 • Dimensional Analysis 21
Base Quantity Symbol for Dimension
Thermodynamic temperature Θ
Amount of substance N
Luminous intensity J
TABLE 1.3 Base Quantities and Their Dimensions
Physicists often use square brackets around the symbol for a physical quantity to represent the dimensions of that
quantity. For example, if is the radius of a cylinder and is its height, then we write the dimensions of the radius and height are both those of length, or L. Similarly, if we use the symbol surface area of a cylinder and for its volume, then [A ] = L2 and [V ] = L3. If we use the symbol cylinder and for the density of the material from which the cylinder is made, then and and
to indicate
for the
for the mass of the
The importance of the concept of dimension arises from the fact that any mathematical equation relating physical
quantities must be dimensionally consistent, which means the equation must obey the following rules:
• Every term in an expression must have the same dimensions; it does not make sense to add or subtract
quantities of differing dimension (think of the old saying: “You can’t add apples and oranges”). In particular,
the expressions on each side of the equality in an equation must have the same dimensions.
• The arguments of any of the standard mathematical functions such as trigonometric functions (such as sine
and cosine), logarithms, or exponential functions that appear in the equation must be dimensionless. These
functions require pure numbers as inputs and give pure numbers as outputs.
If either of these rules is violated, an equation is not dimensionally consistent and cannot possibly be a correct
statement of physical law. This simple fact can be used to check for typos or algebra mistakes, to help remember
the various laws of physics, and even to suggest the form that new laws of physics might take. This last use of
dimensions is beyond the scope of this text, but is something you may learn later in your academic career.
EXAMPLE 1.4
Using Dimensions to Remember an Equation
Suppose we need the formula for the area of a circle for some computation. Like many people who learned
geometry too long ago to recall with any certainty, two expressions may pop into our mind when we think of circles:
and One expression is the circumference of a circle of radius r and the other is its area. But which is which?
Strategy
One natural strategy is to look it up, but this could take time to find information from a reputable source. Besides,
even if we think the source is reputable, we shouldn’t trust everything we read. It is nice to have a way to double-
check just by thinking about it. Also, we might be in a situation in which we cannot look things up (such as during a
test). Thus, the strategy is to find the dimensions of both expressions by making use of the fact that dimensions
follow the rules of algebra. If either expression does not have the same dimensions as area, then it cannot possibly
be the correct equation for the area of a circle.
Solution
We know the dimension of area is L2. Now, the dimension of the expression is
since the constant is a pure number and the radius Similarly, the dimension of the expression is
is a length. Therefore, has the dimension of area.
since the constants and are both dimensionless and the radius is a length. We see that has the dimension
22 1 • Units and Measurement
of length, which means it cannot possibly be an area.
We rule out because it is not dimensionally consistent with being an area. We see that consistent with being an area, so if we have to choose between these two expressions, is dimensionally
is the one to choose.
Significance
This may seem like kind of a silly example, but the ideas are very general. As long as we know the dimensions of the
individual physical quantities that appear in an equation, we can check to see whether the equation is dimensionally
consistent. On the other hand, knowing that true equations are dimensionally consistent, we can match expressions
from our imperfect memories to the quantities for which they might be expressions. Doing this will not help us
remember dimensionless factors that appear in the equations (for example, if you had accidentally conflated the
two expressions from the example into then dimensional analysis is no help), but it does help us remember
the correct basic form of equations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.5
Suppose we want the formula for the volume of a sphere. The two expressions commonly mentioned in elementary
discussions of spheres are and One is the volume of a sphere of radius r and the other is its surface
area. Which one is the volume?
EXAMPLE 1.5
Checking Equations for Dimensional Consistency
Consider the physical quantities and with dimensions and
Determine whether each of the following equations is dimensionally consistent: (a) and (c)
(b)
Strategy
By the definition of dimensional consistency, we need to check that each term in a given equation has the same
dimensions as the other terms in that equation and that the arguments of any standard mathematical functions are
dimensionless.
Solution
a. There are no trigonometric, logarithmic, or exponential functions to worry about in this equation, so we need
only look at the dimensions of each term appearing in the equation. There are three terms, one in the left
expression and two in the expression on the right, so we look at each in turn:
b. All three terms have the same dimension, so this equation is dimensionally consistent.
Again, there are no trigonometric, exponential, or logarithmic functions, so we only need to look at the
dimensions of each of the three terms appearing in the equation:
c. None of the three terms has the same dimension as any other, so this is about as far from being dimensionally
consistent as you can get. The technical term for an equation like this is nonsense.
This equation has a trigonometric function in it, so first we should check that the argument of the sine function
is dimensionless:
Access for free at openstax.org
1.5 • Estimates and Fermi Calculations 23
The argument is dimensionless. So far, so good. Now we need to check the dimensions of each of the two
terms (that is, the left expression and the right expression) in the equation:
The two terms have different dimensions—meaning, the equation is not dimensionally consistent. This equation is
another example of “nonsense.
”
Significance
If we are trusting people, these types of dimensional checks might seem unnecessary. But, rest assured, any
textbook on a quantitative subject such as physics (including this one) almost certainly contains some equations
with typos. Checking equations routinely by dimensional analysis save us the embarrassment of using an incorrect
equation. Also, checking the dimensions of an equation we obtain through algebraic manipulation is a great way to
make sure we did not make a mistake (or to spot a mistake, if we made one).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.6
Is the equation v = atdimensionally consistent?
One further point that needs to be mentioned is the effect of the operations of calculus on dimensions. We have
seen that dimensions obey the rules of algebra, just like units, but what happens when we take the derivative of one
physical quantity with respect to another or integrate a physical quantity over another? The derivative of a function
is just the slope of the line tangent to its graph and slopes are ratios, so for physical quantities v and t , we have that
the dimension of the derivative of v with respect to tis just the ratio of the dimension of v over that of t :
Similarly, since integrals are just sums of products, the dimension of the integral of v with respect to tis simply the
dimension of v times the dimension of t :
By the same reasoning, analogous rules hold for the units of physical quantities derived from other quantities by
integration or differentiation.
1.5 Estimates and Fermi Calculations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Estimate the values of physical quantities.
On many occasions, physicists, other scientists, and engineers need to make estimat es for a particular quantity.
Other terms sometimes used are g uesstimat es, order-of-magnitude approximations, back -of-the-envelope
calculations, or F ermi calculations. (The physicist Enrico Fermi mentioned earlier was famous for his ability to
estimate various kinds of data with surprising precision.) Will that piece of equipment fit in the back of the car or do
we need to rent a truck? How long will this download take? About how large a current will there be in this circuit
when it is turned on? How many houses could a proposed power plant actually power if it is built? Note that
estimating does not mean guessing a number or a formula at random. Rather, estimation means using prior
experience and sound physical reasoning to arrive at a rough idea of a quantity’s value. Because the process of
determining a reliable approximation usually involves the identification of correct physical principles and a good
24 1 • Units and Measurement
guess about the relevant variables, estimating is very useful in developing physical intuition. Estimates also allow us
to perform “sanity checks” on calculations or policy proposals by helping us rule out certain scenarios or unrealistic
numbers. They allow us to challenge others (as well as ourselves) in our efforts to learn truths about the world.
Many estimates are based on formulas in which the input quantities are known only to a limited precision. As you
develop physics problem-solving skills (which are applicable to a wide variety of fields), you also will develop skills
at estimating. You develop these skills by thinking quantitatively and being willing to take risks. As with any skill,
experience helps. Familiarity with dimensions (see Table 1.3) and units (see Table 1.1 and Table 1.2), and the scales
of base quantities (see Figure 1.4) also helps.
To make some progress in estimating, you need to have some definite ideas about how variables may be related.
The following strategies may help you in practicing the art of estimation:
• Get big lengths from smal ler lengths. When estimating lengths, remember that anything can be a ruler. Thus,
imagine breaking a big thing into smaller things, estimate the length of one of the smaller things, and multiply
to get the length of the big thing. For example, to estimate the height of a building, first count how many floors
it has. Then, estimate how big a single floor is by imagining how many people would have to stand on each
other’s shoulders to reach the ceiling. Last, estimate the height of a person. The product of these three
estimates is your estimate of the height of the building. It helps to have memorized a few length scales
relevant to the sorts of problems you find yourself solving. For example, knowing some of the length scales in
Figure 1.4 might come in handy. Sometimes it also helps to do this in reverse—that is, to estimate the length of
a small thing, imagine a bunch of them making up a bigger thing. For example, to estimate the thickness of a
sheet of paper, estimate the thickness of a stack of paper and then divide by the number of pages in the stack.
These same strategies of breaking big things into smaller things or aggregating smaller things into a bigger
thing can sometimes be used to estimate other physical quantities, such as masses and times.
• Get areas and volumes from lengths. When dealing with an area or a volume of a complex object, introduce a
simple model of the object such as a sphere or a box. Then, estimate the linear dimensions (such as the radius
of the sphere or the length, width, and height of the box) first, and use your estimates to obtain the volume or
area from standard geometric formulas. If you happen to have an estimate of an object’s area or volume, you
can also do the reverse; that is, use standard geometric formulas to get an estimate of its linear dimensions.
• Get masses from volumes and densities. When estimating masses of objects, it can help first to estimate its
volume and then to estimate its mass from a rough estimate of its average density (recall, density has
dimension mass over length cubed, so mass is density times volume). For this, it helps to remember that the
density of air is around 1 kg/m3, the density of water is 103 kg/m3, and the densest everyday solids max out at
around 104 kg/m3. Asking yourself whether an object floats or sinks in either air or water gets you a ballpark
estimate of its density. You can also do this the other way around; if you have an estimate of an object’s mass
and its density, you can use them to get an estimate of its volume.
• If al l else fails , bound it. For physical quantities for which you do not have a lot of intuition, sometimes the
best you can do is think something like: Well, it must be bigger than this and smaller than that. For example,
suppose you need to estimate the mass of a moose. Maybe you have a lot of experience with moose and know
their average mass offhand. If so, great. But for most people, the best they can do is to think something like: It
must be bigger than a person (of order 102 kg) and less than a car (of order 103 kg). If you need a single
number for a subsequent calculation, you can take the geometric mean of the upper and lower bound—that is,
you multiply them together and then take the square root. For the moose mass example, this would be
The tighter the bounds, the better. Also, no rules are unbreakable when it comes to estimation. If you think the
value of the quantity is likely to be closer to the upper bound than the lower bound, then you may want to
bump up your estimate from the geometric mean by an order or two of magnitude.
• One “ sig. fig.” is fine . There is no need to go beyond one significant figure, or one digit in the coefficient of an
expression in scientific notation, when doing calculations to obtain an estimate. In most cases, the order of
magnitude is good enough. The goal is just to get in the ballpark figure, so keep the arithmetic as simple as
possible.
• Ask yourself: Does this mak e an y sense?Last, check to see whether your answer is reasonable. How does it
compare with the values of other quantities with the same dimensions that you already know or can look up
Access for free at openstax.org
1.5 • Estimates and Fermi Calculations 25
easily? If you get some wacky answer (for example, if you estimate the mass of the Atlantic Ocean to be bigger
than the mass of Earth, or some time span to be longer than the age of the universe), first check to see
whether your units are correct. Then, check for arithmetic errors. Then, rethink the logic you used to arrive at
your answer. If everything checks out, you may have just proved that some slick new idea is actually bogus.
EXAMPLE 1.6
Mass of Earth’s Oceans
Estimate the total mass of the oceans on Earth.
Strategy
We know the density of water is about 103 kg/m3, so we start with the advice to “get masses from densities and
volumes.” Thus, we need to estimate the volume of the planet’s oceans. Using the advice to “get areas and volumes
from lengths,” we can estimate the volume of the oceans as surface area times average depth, or V= AD . We know
the diameter of Earth from Figure 1.4 and we know that most of Earth’s surface is covered in water, so we can
estimate the surface area of the oceans as being roughly equal to the surface area of the planet. By following the
advice to “get areas and volumes from lengths” again, we can approximate Earth as a sphere and use the formula
for the surface area of a sphere of diameter d —that is, to estimate the surface area of the oceans. Now we
just need to estimate the average depth of the oceans. For this, we use the advice: “If all else fails, bound it.” We
happen to know the deepest points in the ocean are around 10 km and that it is not uncommon for the ocean to be
deeper than 1 km, so we take the average depth to be around Now we just need to
put it all together, heeding the advice that “one ‘sig. fig.’ is fine.
”
Solution
We estimate the surface area of Earth (and hence the surface area of Earth’s oceans) to be roughly
Next, using our average depth estimate of volume of Earth’s oceans to be
which was obtained by bounding, we estimate the
Last, we estimate the mass of the world’s oceans to be
Thus, we estimate that the order of magnitude of the mass of the planet’s oceans is 1021 kg.
Significance
To verify our answer to the best of our ability, we first need to answer the question: Does this make any sense? From
Figure 1.4, we see the mass of Earth’s atmosphere is on the order of 1019 kg and the mass of Earth is on the order of
1025 kg. It is reassuring that our estimate of 1021 kg for the mass of Earth’s oceans falls somewhere between these
two. So, yes, it does seem to make sense. It just so happens that we did a search on the Web for “mass of oceans”
and the top search results all said which is the same order of magnitude as our estimate. Now,
rather than having to trust blindly whoever first put that number up on a website (most of the other sites probably
just copied it from them, after all), we can have a little more confidence in it.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.7
Figure 1.4 says the mass of the atmosphere is 1019 kg. Assuming the density of the atmosphere is 1 kg/m3
,
estimate the height of Earth’s atmosphere. Do you think your answer is an underestimate or an overestimate?
Explain why.
How many piano tuners are there in New York City? How many leaves are on that tree? If you are studying
26 1 • Units and Measurement
photosynthesis or thinking of writing a smartphone app for piano tuners, then the answers to these questions might
be of great interest to you. Otherwise, you probably couldn’t care less what the answers are. However, these are
exactly the sorts of estimation problems that people in various tech industries have been asking potential
employees to evaluate their quantitative reasoning skills. If building physical intuition and evaluating quantitative
claims do not seem like sufficient reasons for you to practice estimation problems, how about the fact that being
good at them just might land you a high-paying job?
INTERACTIVE
For practice estimating relative lengths, areas, and volumes, check out this PhET (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21lengthgame) simulation, titled “Estimation.”
1.6 Significant Figures
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the correct number of significant figures for the result of a computation.
• Describe the relationship between the concepts of accuracy, precision, uncertainty, and discrepancy.
• Calculate the percent uncertainty of a measurement, given its value and its uncertainty.
• Determine the uncertainty of the result of a computation involving quantities with given uncertainties.
Figure 1.11 shows two instruments used to measure the mass of an object. The digital scale has mostly replaced
the double-pan balance in physics labs because it gives more accurate and precise measurements. But what exactly
do we mean by accurat e and precise? Aren’t they the same thing? In this section we examine in detail the process of
making and reporting a measurement.
FIGURE 1.11 (a) A double-pan mechanical balance is used to compare different masses. Usually an object with unknown mass is placed in
one pan and objects of known mass are placed in the other pan. When the bar that connects the two pans is horizontal, then the masses in
both pans are equal. The “known masses” are typically metal cylinders of standard mass such as 1 g, 10 g, and 100 g. (b) Many mechanical
balances, such as double-pan balances, have been replaced by digital scales, which can typically measure the mass of an object more
precisely. A mechanical balance may read only the mass of an object to the nearest tenth of a gram, but many digital scales can measure
the mass of an object up to the nearest thousandth of a gram. (credit a: modification of work by Serge Melki; credit b: modification of work
by Karel Jakubec)
Accuracy and Precision of a Measurement
Science is based on observation and experiment—that is, on measurements. Accuracy is how close a measurement
is to the accepted reference value for that measurement. For example, let’s say we want to measure the length of
standard printer paper. The packaging in which we purchased the paper states that it is 11.0 in. long. We then
measure the length of the paper three times and obtain the following measurements: 11.1 in., 11.2 in., and 10.9 in.
These measurements are quite accurate because they are very close to the reference value of 11.0 in. In contrast, if
we had obtained a measurement of 12 in., our measurement would not be very accurate. Notice that the concept of
accuracy requires that an accepted reference value be given.
Access for free at openstax.org
1.6 • Significant Figures 27
The precision of measurements refers to how close the agreement is between repeated independent
measurements (which are repeated under the same conditions). Consider the example of the paper measurements.
The precision of the measurements refers to the spread of the measured values. One way to analyze the precision of
the measurements is to determine the range, or difference, between the lowest and the highest measured values. In
this case, the lowest value was 10.9 in. and the highest value was 11.2 in. Thus, the measured values deviated from
each other by, at most, 0.3 in. These measurements were relatively precise because they did not vary too much in
value. However, if the measured values had been 10.9 in., 11.1 in., and 11.9 in., then the measurements would not
be very precise because there would be significant variation from one measurement to another. Notice that the
concept of precision depends only on the actual measurements acquired and does not depend on an accepted
reference value.
The measurements in the paper example are both accurate and precise, but in some cases, measurements are
accurate but not precise, or they are precise but not accurate. Let’s consider an example of a GPS attempting to
locate the position of a restaurant in a city. Think of the restaurant location as existing at the center of a bull’s-eye
target and think of each GPS attempt to locate the restaurant as a black dot. In Figure 1.12(a), we see the GPS
measurements are spread out far apart from each other, but they are all relatively close to the actual location of the
restaurant at the center of the target. This indicates a low-precision, high-accuracy measuring system. However, in
Figure 1.12(b), the GPS measurements are concentrated quite closely to one another, but they are far away from the
target location. This indicates a high-precision, low-accuracy measuring system.
FIGURE 1.12 A GPS attempts to locate a restaurant at the center of the bull’s-eye. The black dots represent each attempt to pinpoint the
location of the restaurant. (a) The dots are spread out quite far apart from one another, indicating low precision, but they are each rather
close to the actual location of the restaurant, indicating high accuracy. (b) The dots are concentrated rather closely to one another,
indicating high precision, but they are rather far away from the actual location of the restaurant, indicating low accuracy. (credit a and credit
b: modification of works by "DarkEvil"/Wikimedia Commons)
Accuracy, Precision, Uncertainty, and Discrepancy
The precision of a measuring system is related to the uncertainty in the measurements whereas the accuracy is
related to the discrepancy from the accepted reference value. Uncertainty is a quantitative measure of how much
your measured values deviate from one another. There are many different methods of calculating uncertainty, each
of which is appropriate to different situations. Some examples include taking the range (that is, the largest minus
the smallest) or finding the standard deviation of the measurements. Discrepancy (or “measurement error”) is the
difference between the measured value and a given standard or expected value. If the measurements are not very
precise, then the uncertainty of the values is high. If the measurements are not very accurate, then the discrepancy
of the values is high.
Recall our example of measuring paper length; we obtained measurements of 11.1 in., 11.2 in., and 10.9 in., and the
accepted value was 11.0 in. We might average the three measurements to say our best guess is 11.1 in.; in this
case, our discrepancy is 11.1 – 11.0 = 0.1 in., which provides a quantitative measure of accuracy. We might
calculate the uncertainty in our best guess by using half of the range of our measured values: 0.15 in. Then we
would say the length of the paper is 11.1 in. plus or minus 0.15 in. The uncertainty in a measurement, A , is often
denoted as δ A(read “delta A ”), so the measurement result would be recorded as A± δ A . Returning to our paper
example, the measured length of the paper could be expressed as 11.1 ± 0.15 in. Since the discrepancy of 0.1 in. is
less than the uncertainty of 0.15 in., we might say the measured value agrees with the accepted reference value to
28 1 • Units and Measurement
within experimental uncertainty.
Some factors that contribute to uncertainty in a measurement include the following:
• Limitations of the measuring device
• The skill of the person taking the measurement
• Irregularities in the object being measured
• Any other factors that affect the outcome (highly dependent on the situation)
In our example, such factors contributing to the uncertainty could be the smallest division on the ruler is 1/16 in.,
the person using the ruler has bad eyesight, the ruler is worn down on one end, or one side of the paper is slightly
longer than the other. At any rate, the uncertainty in a measurement must be calculated to quantify its precision. If a
reference value is known, it makes sense to calculate the discrepancy as well to quantify its accuracy.
Percent uncertainty
Another method of expressing uncertainty is as a percent of the measured value. If a measurement Ais expressed
with uncertainty δ A , the percent uncertainty is defined as
EXAMPLE 1.7
Calculating Percent Uncertainty: A Bag of Apples
A grocery store sells 5-lb bags of apples. Let’s say we purchase four bags during the course of a month and weigh
the bags each time. We obtain the following measurements:
• Week 1 weight: 4.8 lb
• Week 2 weight: 5.3 lb
• Week 3 weight: 4.9 lb
• Week 4 weight: 5.4 lb
We then determine the average weight of the 5-lb bag of apples is 5.1 ± 0.3 lb from using half of the range. What is
the percent uncertainty of the bag’s weight?
Strategy
First, observe that the average value of the bag’s weight, A , is 5.1 lb. The uncertainty in this value, can use the following equation to determine the percent uncertainty of the weight:
is 0.3 lb. We
1.1
Solution
Substitute the values into the equation:
Significance
We can conclude the average weight of a bag of apples from this store is 5.1 lb ± 6%. Notice the percent uncertainty
is dimensionless because the units of weight in lb canceled those in A= 5.1 lb when we took the ratio.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 1.8
A high school track coach has just purchased a new stopwatch. The stopwatch manual states the stopwatch has an
uncertainty of ±0.05 s. Runners on the track coach’s team regularly clock 100-m sprints of 11.49 s to 15.01 s. At the
Access for free at openstax.org
1.6 • Significant Figures 29
school’s last track meet, the first-place sprinter came in at 12.04 s and the second-place sprinter came in at 12.07
s. Will the coach’s new stopwatch be helpful in timing the sprint team? Why or why not?
Uncertainties in calculations
Uncertainty exists in anything calculated from measured quantities. For example, the area of a floor calculated from
measurements of its length and width has an uncertainty because the length and width have uncertainties. How big
is the uncertainty in something you calculate by multiplication or division? If the measurements going into the
calculation have small uncertainties (a few percent or less), then the method of adding percents can be used for
multiplication or division. This method states the percent uncertainty in a quantity calculat ed b y mul tiplication or
division is the sum of the percent uncertainties in the it ems used t o mak e the calculation. For example, if a floor has
a length of 4.00 m and a width of 3.00 m, with uncertainties of 2% and 1%, respectively, then the area of the floor is
12.0 m2 and has an uncertainty of 3%. (Expressed as an area, this is 0.36 m2 [ ], which we round to
0.4 m2 since the area of the floor is given to a tenth of a square meter.)
Precision of Measuring Tools and Significant Figures
An important factor in the precision of measurements involves the precision of the measuring tool. In general, a
precise measuring tool is one that can measure values in very small increments. For example, a standard ruler can
measure length to the nearest millimeter whereas a caliper can measure length to the nearest 0.01 mm. The caliper
is a more precise measuring tool because it can measure extremely small differences in length. The more precise
the measuring tool, the more precise the measurements.
When we express measured values, we can only list as many digits as we measured initially with our measuring tool.
For example, if we use a standard ruler to measure the length of a stick, we may measure it to be 36.7 cm. We can’t
express this value as 36.71 cm because our measuring tool is not precise enough to measure a hundredth of a
centimeter. It should be noted that the last digit in a measured value has been estimated in some way by the person
performing the measurement. For example, the person measuring the length of a stick with a ruler notices the stick
length seems to be somewhere in between 36.6 cm and 36.7 cm, and he or she must estimate the value of the last
digit. Using the method of significant figures, the rule is that the last digit writ t en down in a measurement is the
first digit with some uncertainty. To determine the number of significant digits in a value, start with the first
measured value at the left and count the number of digits through the last digit written on the right. For example, the
measured value 36.7 cm has three digits, or three significant figures. Significant figures indicate the precision of the
measuring tool used to measure a value.
Zeros
Special consideration is given to zeros when counting significant figures. The zeros in 0.053 are not significant
because they are placeholders that locate the decimal point. There are two significant figures in 0.053. The zeros in
10.053 are not placeholders; they are significant. This number has five significant figures. The zeros in 1300 may or
may not be significant, depending on the style of writing numbers. They could mean the number is known to the last
digit or they could be placeholders. So 1300 could have two, three, or four significant figures. To avoid this
ambiguity, we should write 1300 in scientific notation as or depending on
whether it has two, three, or four significant figures. Z eros are significant except when the y serve onl y as
placeholders.
Significant figures in calculations
When combining measurements with different degrees of precision with the mathematical operations of addition,
subtraction, multiplication, or division, then the number of significant digits in the final answer can be no great er
than the number of significant digits in the least-precise measured value. There are two different rules, one for
multiplication and division and the other for addition and subtraction.
1. F or mul tiplication and division, the resul t should have the same number of significant fig ures as the quantity
with the least number of significant fig ures ent ering int o the calculation. For example, the area of a circle can
be calculated from its radius using A= π r2. Let’s see how many significant figures the area has if the radius has
only two—say, r = 1.2 m. Using a calculator with an eight-digit output, we would calculate
30 1 • Units and Measurement
But because the radius has only two significant figures, it limits the calculated quantity to two significant
figures, or
2. although π is good to at least eight digits.
F or addition and sub traction, the answer can contain no more decimal places than the least-precise
measurement. Suppose we buy 7.56 kg of potatoes in a grocery store as measured with a scale with precision
0.01 kg, then we drop off 6.052 kg of potatoes at your laboratory as measured by a scale with precision 0.001
kg. Then, we go home and add 13.7 kg of potatoes as measured by a bathroom scale with precision 0.1 kg.
How many kilograms of potatoes do we now have and how many significant figures are appropriate in the
answer? The mass is found by simple addition and subtraction:
Next, we identify the least-precise measurement: 13.7 kg. This measurement is expressed to the 0.1 decimal
place, so our final answer must also be expressed to the 0.1 decimal place. Thus, the answer is rounded to the
tenths place, giving us 15.2 kg.
Significant figures in this text
In this text, most numbers are assumed to have three significant figures. Furthermore, consistent numbers of
significant figures are used in all worked examples. An answer given to three digits is based on input good to at least
three digits, for example. If the input has fewer significant figures, the answer will also have fewer significant figures.
Care is also taken that the number of significant figures is reasonable for the situation posed. In some topics,
particularly in optics, more accurate numbers are needed and we use more than three significant figures. Finally, if a
number is exact , such as the two in the formula for the circumference of a circle, C= 2πr, it does not affect the
number of significant figures in a calculation. Likewise, conversion factors such as 100 cm/1 m are considered exact
and do not affect the number of significant figures in a calculation.
1.7 Solving Problems in Physics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the process for developing a problem-solving strategy.
• Explain how to find the numerical solution to a problem.
• Summarize the process for assessing the significance of the numerical solution to a problem.
FIGURE 1.13 Problem-solving skills are essential to your success in physics. (credit: “scui3asteveo”/Flickr)
Problem-solving skills are clearly essential to success in a quantitative course in physics. More important, the ability
Access for free at openstax.org
1.7 • Solving Problems in Physics 31
to apply broad physical principles—usually represented by equations—to specific situations is a very powerful form
of knowledge. It is much more powerful than memorizing a list of facts. Analytical skills and problem-solving
abilities can be applied to new situations whereas a list of facts cannot be made long enough to contain every
possible circumstance. Such analytical skills are useful both for solving problems in this text and for applying
physics in everyday life.
As you are probably well aware, a certain amount of creativity and insight is required to solve problems. No rigid
procedure works every time. Creativity and insight grow with experience. With practice, the basics of problem
solving become almost automatic. One way to get practice is to work out the text’s examples for yourself as you
read. Another is to work as many end-of-section problems as possible, starting with the easiest to build confidence
and then progressing to the more difficult. After you become involved in physics, you will see it all around you, and
you can begin to apply it to situations you encounter outside the classroom, just as is done in many of the
applications in this text.
Although there is no simple step-by-step method that works for every problem, the following three-stage process
facilitates problem solving and makes it more meaningful. The three stages are strategy, solution, and significance.
This process is used in examples throughout the book. Here, we look at each stage of the process in turn.
Strategy
Strategy is the beginning stage of solving a problem. The idea is to figure out exactly what the problem is and then
develop a strategy for solving it. Some general advice for this stage is as follows:
• Examine the situation t o det ermine which ph ysical principles are invol ved . It often helps to draw a simple
sk et chat the outset. You often need to decide which direction is positive and note that on your sketch. When
you have identified the physical principles, it is much easier to find and apply the equations representing those
principles. Although finding the correct equation is essential, keep in mind that equations represent physical
principles, laws of nature, and relationships among physical quantities. Without a conceptual understanding of
a problem, a numerical solution is meaningless.
• Mak e a list of what is given or can be inf erred from the problem as stat ed (identif y the “knowns”) . Many
problems are stated very succinctly and require some inspection to determine what is known. Drawing a
sketch can be very useful at this point as well. Formally identifying the knowns is of particular importance in
applying physics to real-world situations. For example, the word st oppedmeans the velocity is zero at that
instant. Also, we can often take initial time and position as zero by the appropriate choice of coordinate
system.
• I dentif y exactl y what needs t o be det ermined in the problem (identif y the unknowns) . In complex problems,
especially, it is not always obvious what needs to be found or in what sequence. Making a list can help identify
the unknowns.
• Det ermine which ph ysical principles can help you sol ve the problem. Since physical principles tend to be
expressed in the form of mathematical equations, a list of knowns and unknowns can help here. It is easiest if
you can find equations that contain only one unknown—that is, all the other variables are known—so you can
solve for the unknown easily. If the equation contains more than one unknown, then additional equations are
needed to solve the problem. In some problems, several unknowns must be determined to get at the one
needed most. In such problems it is especially important to keep physical principles in mind to avoid going
astray in a sea of equations. You may have to use two (or more) different equations to get the final answer.
Solution
The solution stage is when you do the math. Substitut e the knowns (along with their units) int o the appropriat e
equation and ob tain numerical solutions complet e with units. That is, do the algebra, calculus, geometry, or
arithmetic necessary to find the unknown from the knowns, being sure to carry the units through the calculations.
This step is clearly important because it produces the numerical answer, along with its units. Notice, however, that
this stage is only one-third of the overall problem-solving process.
Significance
After having done the math in the solution stage of problem solving, it is tempting to think you are done. But, always
remember that physics is not math. Rather, in doing physics, we use mathematics as a tool to help us understand
32 1 • Units and Measurement
nature. So, after you obtain a numerical answer, you should always assess its significance:
• Check your units. If the units of the answer are incorrect, then an error has been made and you should go back
over your previous steps to find it. One way to find the mistake is to check all the equations you derived for
dimensional consistency. However, be warned that correct units do not guarantee the numerical part of the
answer is also correct.
• Check the answer t o see whether it is reasonable . Does it mak e sense?This step is extremely important: –the
goal of physics is to describe nature accurately. To determine whether the answer is reasonable, check both
its magnitude and its sign, in addition to its units. The magnitude should be consistent with a rough estimate
of what it should be. It should also compare reasonably with magnitudes of other quantities of the same type.
The sign usually tells you about direction and should be consistent with your prior expectations. Your
judgment will improve as you solve more physics problems, and it will become possible for you to make finer
judgments regarding whether nature is described adequately by the answer to a problem. This step brings the
problem back to its conceptual meaning. If you can judge whether the answer is reasonable, you have a
deeper understanding of physics than just being able to solve a problem mechanically.
• Check t o see whether the answer t el ls you something int eresting. What does it mean?This is the flip side of
the question: Does it make sense? Ultimately, physics is about understanding nature, and we solve physics
problems to learn a little something about how nature operates. Therefore, assuming the answer does make
sense, you should always take a moment to see if it tells you something about the world that you find
interesting. Even if the answer to this particular problem is not very interesting to you, what about the method
you used to solve it? Could the method be adapted to answer a question that you do find interesting? In many
ways, it is in answering questions such as these that science progresses.
Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter Review
Key Terms
accuracy the degree to which a measured value
agrees with an accepted reference value for that
measurement
base quantity physical quantity chosen by
convention and practical considerations such that
all other physical quantities can be expressed as
algebraic combinations of them
base unit standard for expressing the measurement
of a base quantity within a particular system of
units; defined by a particular procedure used to
measure the corresponding base quantity
conversion factor a ratio that expresses how many of
one unit are equal to another unit
derived quantity physical quantity defined using
algebraic combinations of base quantities
derived units units that can be calculated using
algebraic combinations of the fundamental units
dimension expression of the dependence of a
physical quantity on the base quantities as a
product of powers of symbols representing the base
quantities; in general, the dimension of a quantity
has the form for some powers a,
b, c, d, e, f, and g.
dimensionally consistent equation in which every
term has the same dimensions and the arguments
of any mathematical functions appearing in the
equation are dimensionless
dimensionless quantity with a dimension of
also called quantity of
dimension 1 or a pure number
discrepancy the difference between the measured
value and a given standard or expected value
English units system of measurement used in the
United States; includes units of measure such as
feet, gallons, and pounds
estimation using prior experience and sound physical
reasoning to arrive at a rough idea of a quantity’s
value; sometimes called an “order-of-magnitude
approximation,” a “guesstimate,” a “back-of-the-
envelope calculation”, or a “Fermi calculation”
kilogram SI unit for mass, abbreviated kg
Key Equations
Percent uncertainty
Summary
1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
• Physics is about trying to find the simple laws
that describe all natural phenomena.
1 • Chapter Review 33
law description, using concise language or a
mathematical formula, of a generalized pattern in
nature supported by scientific evidence and
repeated experiments
meter SI unit for length, abbreviated m
method of adding percents the percent uncertainty
in a quantity calculated by multiplication or division
is the sum of the percent uncertainties in the items
used to make the calculation.
metric system system in which values can be
calculated in factors of 10
model representation of something often too difficult
(or impossible) to display directly
order of magnitude the size of a quantity as it relates
to a power of 10
percent uncertainty the ratio of the uncertainty of a
measurement to the measured value, expressed as
a percentage
physical quantity characteristic or property of an
object that can be measured or calculated from
other measurements
physics science concerned with describing the
interactions of energy, matter, space, and time;
especially interested in what fundamental
mechanisms underlie every phenomenon
precision the degree to which repeated
measurements agree with each other
second the SI unit for time, abbreviated s
SI units the international system of units that
scientists in most countries have agreed to use;
includes units such as meters, liters, and grams
significant figures used to express the precision of a
measuring tool used to measure a value
theory testable explanation for patterns in nature
supported by scientific evidence and verified
multiple times by various groups of researchers
uncertainty a quantitative measure of how much
measured values deviate from one another
units standards used for expressing and comparing
measurements
• Physics operates on a vast range of scales of
length, mass, and time. Scientists use the
concept of the order of magnitude of a number to
34 1 • Chapter Review
track which phenomena occur on which scales.
They also use orders of magnitude to compare
the various scales.
• Scientists attempt to describe the world by
formulating models, theories, and laws.
1.2 Units and Standards
• Systems of units are built up from a small
number of base units, which are defined by
accurate and precise measurements of
conventionally chosen base quantities. Other
units are then derived as algebraic combinations
of the base units.
• Two commonly used systems of units are English
units and SI units. All scientists and most of the
other people in the world use SI, whereas
nonscientists in the United States still tend to
use English units.
• The SI base units of length, mass, and time are
the meter (m), kilogram (kg), and second (s),
respectively.
• SI units are a metric system of units, meaning
values can be calculated by factors of 10. Metric
prefixes may be used with metric units to scale
the base units to sizes appropriate for almost any
application.
1.3 Unit Conversion
• To convert a quantity from one unit to another,
multiply by conversion factors in such a way that
you cancel the units you want to get rid of and
introduce the units you want to end up with.
• Be careful with areas and volumes. Units obey
the rules of algebra so, for example, if a unit is
squared we need two factors to cancel it.
1.4 Dimensional Analysis
• The dimension of a physical quantity is just an
expression of the base quantities from which it is
derived.
• All equations expressing physical laws or
principles must be dimensionally consistent. This
fact can be used as an aid in remembering
physical laws, as a way to check whether claimed
relationships between physical quantities are
possible, and even to derive new physical laws.
1.5 Estimates and Fermi Calculations
value of a physical quantity based on prior
experience and sound physical reasoning. Some
strategies that may help when making an
estimate are as follows:
◦ Get big lengths from smaller lengths.
◦ Get areas and volumes from lengths.
◦ Get masses from volumes and densities.
◦ If all else fails, bound it.
◦ One “sig. fig.” is fine.
◦ Ask yourself: Does this make any sense?
1.6 Significant Figures
• Accuracy of a measured value refers to how close
a measurement is to an accepted reference
value. The discrepancy in a measurement is the
amount by which the measurement result differs
from this value.
• Precision of measured values refers to how close
the agreement is between repeated
measurements. The uncertainty of a
measurement is a quantification of this.
• The precision of a measuring tool is related to the
size of its measurement increments. The smaller
the measurement increment, the more precise
the tool.
• Significant figures express the precision of a
measuring tool.
• When multiplying or dividing measured values,
the final answer can contain only as many
significant figures as the value with the least
number of significant figures.
• When adding or subtracting measured values,
the final answer cannot contain more decimal
places than the least-precise value.
1.7 Solving Problems in Physics
The three stages of the process for solving physics
problems used in this book are as follows:
• Strat eg y: Determine which physical principles
are involved and develop a strategy for using
them to solve the problem.
• Solution: Do the math necessary to obtain a
numerical solution complete with units.
• Significance: Check the solution to make sure it
makes sense (correct units, reasonable
magnitude and sign) and assess its significance.
• An estimate is a rough educated guess at the
Access for free at openstax.org
Conceptual Questions
1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
1. What is physics?
2. 3. Some have described physics as a “search for
simplicity.” Explain why this might be an
appropriate description.
If two different theories describe experimental
observations equally well, can one be said to be
more valid than the other (assuming both use
accepted rules of logic)?
What determines the validity of a theory?
Certain criteria must be satisfied if a
measurement or observation is to be believed.
Will the criteria necessarily be as strict for an
expected result as for an unexpected result?
Can the validity of a model be limited or must it
be universally valid? How does this compare
with the required validity of a theory or a law?
1.2 Units and Standards
4. 5. 6. 7. Identify some advantages of metric units.
8. What are the SI base units of length, mass, and
time?
9. What is the difference between a base unit and a
derived unit? (b) What is the difference between
a base quantity and a derived quantity? (c) What
Problems
1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
14. Find the order of magnitude of the following
physical quantities. (a) The mass of Earth’s
atmosphere: (b) The mass of the
Moon’s atmosphere: 25,000 kg; (c) The mass of
Earth’s hydrosphere: (d) The
mass of Earth: (e) The mass of
the Moon: (f) The Earth–Moon
distance (semimajor axis): (g)
The mean Earth–Sun distance:
(h) The equatorial radius of Earth:
(i) The mass of an electron:
(j) The mass of a proton:
(k) The mass of the Sun:
15. Use the orders of magnitude you found in the
previous problem to answer the following
questions to within an order of magnitude. (a)
How many electrons would it take to equal the
1 • Chapter Review 35
10. is the difference between a base quantity and a
base unit?
For each of the following scenarios, refer to
Figure 1.4 and Table 1.2 to determine which
metric prefix on the meter is most appropriate
for each of the following scenarios. (a) You want
to tabulate the mean distance from the Sun for
each planet in the solar system. (b) You want to
compare the sizes of some common viruses to
design a mechanical filter capable of blocking
the pathogenic ones. (c) You want to list the
diameters of all the elements on the periodic
table. (d) You want to list the distances to all the
stars that have now received any radio
broadcasts sent from Earth 10 years ago.
1.6 Significant Figures
11. (a) What is the relationship between the
precision and the uncertainty of a
measurement? (b) What is the relationship
between the accuracy and the discrepancy of a
measurement?
1.7 Solving Problems in Physics
12. What information do you need to choose which
equation or equations to use to solve a problem?
13. What should you do after obtaining a numerical
answer when solving a problem?
mass of a proton? (b) How many Earths would it
take to equal the mass of the Sun? (c) How many
Earth–Moon distances would it take to cover the
distance from Earth to the Sun? (d) How many
Moon atmospheres would it take to equal the
mass of Earth’s atmosphere? (e) How many
moons would it take to equal the mass of Earth?
(f) How many protons would it take to equal the
mass of the Sun?
For the remaining questions, you need to use Figure
1.4 to obtain the necessary orders of magnitude of
lengths, masses, and times.
16. Roughly how many heartbeats are there in a
lifetime?
17. A generation is about one-third of a lifetime.
Approximately how many generations have
passed since the year 0?
18. Roughly how many times longer than the mean
36 1 • Chapter Review
19. 20. 21. 22. 23. life of an extremely unstable atomic nucleus is
the lifetime of a human?
Calculate the approximate number of atoms in a
bacterium. Assume the average mass of an atom
in the bacterium is 10 times the mass of a
proton.
(a) Calculate the number of cells in a
hummingbird assuming the mass of an average
cell is 10 times the mass of a bacterium. (b)
Making the same assumption, how many cells
are there in a human?
Assuming one nerve impulse must end before
another can begin, what is the maximum firing
rate of a nerve in impulses per second?
About how many floating-point operations can a
supercomputer perform each year?
Roughly how many floating-point operations can
a supercomputer perform in a human lifetime?
1.2 Units and Standards
24. 25. 26. 27. 28. The following times are given using metric
prefixes on the base SI unit of time: the second.
Rewrite them in scientific notation without the
prefix. For example, 47 Ts would be rewritten as
(a) 980 Ps; (b) 980 fs; (c) 17 ns;
(d)
The following times are given in seconds. Use
metric prefixes to rewrite them so the numerical
value is greater than one but less than 1000. For
example, could be written as
either 7.9 cs or 79 ms. (a) (b)
0.045 s; (c) (d)
The following lengths are given using metric
prefixes on the base SI unit of length: the meter.
Rewrite them in scientific notation without the
prefix. For example, 4.2 Pm would be rewritten
as (a) 89 Tm; (b) 89 pm; (c) 711
mm; (d)
The following lengths are given in meters. Use
metric prefixes to rewrite them so the numerical
value is bigger than one but less than 1000. For
example, could be written either
as 7.9 cm or 79 mm. (a) (b)
0.0074 m; (c) (d)
The following masses are written using metric
prefixes on the gram. Rewrite them in scientific
notation in terms of the SI base unit of mass: the
Access for free at openstax.org
29. 30. 31. 32. 33. kilogram. For example, 40 Mg would be written
as (a) 23 mg; (b) 320 Tg; (c) 42 ng;
(d) 7 g; (e) 9 Pg.
The following masses are given in kilograms. Use
metric prefixes on the gram to rewrite them so
the numerical value is bigger than one but less
than 1000. For example, could be
written as 70 cg or 700 mg. (a)
(b) (c) (d)
(e)
1.3 Unit Conversion
The volume of Earth is on the order of 1021 m3
.
(a) What is this in cubic kilometers (km3)? (b)
What is it in cubic miles (mi3)? (c) What is it in
cubic centimeters (cm3)?
The speed limit on some interstate highways is
roughly 100 km/h. (a) What is this in meters per
second? (b) How many miles per hour is this?
A car is traveling at a speed of 33 m/s. (a) What
is its speed in kilometers per hour? (b) Is it
exceeding the 90 km/h speed limit?
In SI units, speeds are measured in meters per
second (m/s). But, depending on where you live,
you’re probably more comfortable of thinking of
speeds in terms of either kilometers per hour
(km/h) or miles per hour (mi/h). In this problem,
you will see that 1 m/s is roughly 4 km/h or 2 mi/
h, which is handy to use when developing your
physical intuition. More precisely, show that (a)
and (b)
American football is played on a 100-yd-long
field, excluding the end zones. How long is the
field in meters? (Assume that 1 m = 3.281 ft.)
Soccer fields vary in size. A large soccer field is
115 m long and 85.0 m wide. What is its area in
square feet? (Assume that 1 m = 3.281 ft.)
What is the height in meters of a person who is 6
ft 1.0 in. tall?
Mount Everest, at 29,028 ft, is the tallest
mountain on Earth. What is its height in
kilometers? (Assume that 1 m = 3.281 ft.)
The speed of sound is measured to be 342 m/s
on a certain day. What is this measurement in
kilometers per hour?
Tectonic plates are large segments of Earth’s
crust that move slowly. Suppose one such plate
has an average speed of 4.0 cm/yr. (a) What
34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 
40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. distance does it move in 1.0 s at this speed? (b)
What is its speed in kilometers per million years?
The average distance between Earth and the Sun
is (a) Calculate the average
speed of Earth in its orbit (assumed to be
circular) in meters per second. (b) What is this
speed in miles per hour?
The density of nuclear matter is about 1018
kg/m3. Given that 1 mL is equal in volume to
cm3, what is the density of nuclear matter in
megagrams per microliter (that is, )?
The density of aluminum is 2.7 g/cm3. What is
the density in kilograms per cubic meter?
A commonly used unit of mass in the English
system is the pound-mass, abbreviated lbm,
where 1 lbm = 0.454 kg. What is the density of
water in pound-mass per cubic foot?
A furlong is 220 yd. A fortnight is 2 weeks.
Convert a speed of one furlong per fortnight to
millimeters per second.
It takes radians (rad) to get around a circle,
which is the same as 360°. How many radians
are in 1°?
46. Light travels a distance of about A
light-minute is the distance light travels in 1 min.
If the Sun is from Earth, how far
away is it in light-minutes?
47. A light-nanosecond is the distance light travels
in 1 ns. Convert 1 ft to light-nanoseconds.
48. An electron has a mass of A
proton has a mass of What is
the mass of a proton in electron-masses?
49. A fluid ounce is about 30 mL. What is the volume
of a 12 fl-oz can of soda pop in cubic meters?
1.4 Dimensional Analysis
50. A student is trying to remember some formulas
from geometry. In what follows, assume is
area, is volume, and all other variables are
lengths. Determine which formulas are
dimensionally consistent. (a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e)
Consider the physical quantities s, v , a , and t
with dimensions
and Determine whether
each of the following equations is dimensionally
51. 1 • Chapter Review 37
55. consistent. (a) (b)
(c) (d)
52. Consider the physical quantities , , , , , and
with dimensions [m] = M, [s] = L, [v] = LT–1, [a]
= LT–2, [t ] = T, and [r] = L. Assuming each of the
following equations is dimensionally consistent,
find the dimension of the quantity on the left-
hand side of the equation: (a) F= ma; (b) K=
0.5mv2; (c) p = mv; (d) W= mas; (e) L = mvr.
53. Suppose quantity is a length and quantity is a
time. Suppose the quantities and are defined
by v = ds/dtand a = dv/dt . (a) What is the
dimension of v? (b) What is the dimension of the
quantity a? What are the dimensions of (c)
(d) and (e) da/dt ?
54. Suppose [V] = L3
, and [t] = T. (a)
What is the dimension of (b) What is
the dimension of dV /dt ? (c) What is the
dimension of
The arc length formula says the length subtended by angle Ɵ in a circle of radius of arc
is
given by the equation Ɵ What are the
dimensions of (a) s, (b) r, and (c) Ɵ
1.5 Estimates and Fermi Calculations
Assuming the human body is made primarily of
water, estimate the volume of a person.
Assuming the human body is primarily made of
water, estimate the number of molecules in it.
(Note that water has a molecular mass of 18 g/
mol and there are roughly 1024 atoms in a
mole.)
Estimate the mass of air in a classroom.
Estimate the number of molecules that make up
Earth, assuming an average molecular mass of
30 g/mol. (Note there are on the order of 1024
objects per mole.)
Estimate the surface area of a person.
Roughly how many solar systems would it take
to tile the disk of the Milky Way?
(a) Estimate the density of the Moon. (b)
Estimate the diameter of the Moon. (c) Given
that the Moon subtends at an angle of about half
a degree in the sky, estimate its distance from
56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 
63. 64. 65. 38 1 • Chapter Review
Earth.
The average density of the Sun is on the order
103 kg/m3. (a) Estimate the diameter of the Sun.
(b) Given that the Sun subtends at an angle of
about half a degree in the sky, estimate its
distance from Earth.
Estimate the mass of a virus.
A floating-point operation is a single arithmetic
operation such as addition, subtraction,
multiplication, or division. (a) Estimate the
maximum number of floating-point operations a
human being could possibly perform in a
lifetime. (b) How long would it take a
supercomputer to perform that many floating-
point operations?
1.6 Significant Figures
66. Consider the equation 4000/400 = 10.0.
Assuming the number of significant figures in the
answer is correct, what can you say about the
number of significant figures in 4000 and 400?
Suppose your bathroom scale reads your mass
as 65 kg with a 3% uncertainty. What is the
uncertainty in your mass (in kilograms)?
A good-quality measuring tape can be off by
0.50 cm over a distance of 20 m. What is its
percent uncertainty?
An infant’s pulse rate is measured to be 130 ± 5
beats/min. What is the percent uncertainty in
this measurement?
(a) Suppose that a person has an average heart
rate of 72.0 beats/min. How many beats do they
have in 2.0 years? (b) In 2.00 years? (c) In 2.000
years?
71. A can contains 375 mL of soda. How much is left
after 308 mL is removed?
72. State how many significant figures are proper in
the results of the following calculations: (a)
(b) (c)
Additional Problems
80. Consider the equation y = mt +b , where the
dimension of y is length and the dimension of tis
time, and m and bare constants. What are the
dimensions and SI units of (a) m and (b) b ?
81. Consider the equation
where s is a length and tis a time. What are the
67. 68. 69. 70. Access for free at openstax.org
73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. 82. 83. (a) How many significant figures are in the
numbers 99 and 100.? (b) If the uncertainty in
each number is 1, what is the percent
uncertainty in each? (c) Which is a more
meaningful way to express the accuracy of these
two numbers: significant figures or percent
uncertainties?
(a) If your speedometer has an uncertainty of
2.0 km/h at a speed of 90 km/h, what is the
percent uncertainty? (b) If it has the same
percent uncertainty when it reads 60 km/h, what
is the range of speeds you could be going?
(a) A person’s blood pressure is measured to be
What is its percent
uncertainty? (b) Assuming the same percent
uncertainty, what is the uncertainty in a blood
pressure measurement of 80 mm Hg?
A person measures their heart rate by counting
the number of beats in 30 s. If 40 ± 1 beats are
counted in 30.0 ± 0.5 s, what is the heart rate
and its uncertainty in beats per minute?
What is the area of a circle 3.102 cm in
diameter?
Determine the number of significant figures in
the following measurements: (a) 0.0009, (b)
15,450.0, (c) 6×103, (d) 87.990, and (e) 30.42.
Perform the following calculations and express
your answer using the correct number of
significant digits. (a) A woman has two bags
weighing 13.5 lb and one bag with a weight of
10.2 lb. What is the total weight of the bags? (b)
The force Fon an object is equal to its mass m
multiplied by its acceleration a. If a wagon with
mass 55 kg accelerates at a rate of 0.0255 m/s2
,
what is the force on the wagon? (The unit of
force is called the newt on and it is expressed
with the symbol N.)
dimensions and SI units of (a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) and (f) c?
(a) A car speedometer has a 5% uncertainty.
What is the range of possible speeds when it
reads 90 km/h? (b) Convert this range to miles
per hour. Note 1 km = 0.6214 mi.
A marathon runner completes a 42.188-km
course in 2 h, 30 min, and 12 s. There is an
uncertainty of 25 m in the distance traveled and
an uncertainty of 1 s in the elapsed time. (a)
Calculate the percent uncertainty in the
distance. (b) Calculate the percent uncertainty in
the elapsed time. (c) What is the average speed
in meters per second? (d) What is the
uncertainty in the average speed?
84. The sides of a small rectangular box are
measured to be 1.80 ± 0.1 cm, 2.05 ± 0.02 cm,
and 3.1 ± 0.1 cm long. Calculate its volume and
uncertainty in cubic centimeters.
85. When nonmetric units were used in the United
Kingdom, a unit of mass called the pound-mass
(lbm) was used, where 1 lbm = 0.4539 kg. (a) If
there is an uncertainty of 0.0001 kg in the
Challenge Problems
88. The first atomic bomb was detonated on July 16,
1945, at the Trinity test site about 200 mi south
of Los Alamos. In 1947, the U.S. government
declassified a film reel of the explosion. From
this film reel, British physicist G. I. Taylor was
able to determine the rate at which the radius of
the fireball from the blast grew. Using
dimensional analysis, he was then able to
deduce the amount of energy released in the
explosion, which was a closely guarded secret at
the time. Because of this, Taylor did not publish
his results until 1950. This problem challenges
you to recreate this famous calculation. (a) Using
keen physical insight developed from years of
experience, Taylor decided the radius r of the
fireball should depend only on the following
variables:
t , the time since the explosion,
and the density of the air,
E , the energy of the inital explosion.
Thus, he made the educated guess that
for some dimensionless constant k
and some unknown exponents a, b , and c. Given
that [E] = ML2T–2, determine the values of the
exponents necessary to make this equation
dimensionally consistent. (Hint : Notice the
equation implies that and that
) (b) By analyzing data from high-energy
conventional explosives, Taylor found the
formula he derived seemed to be valid as long as
the constant khad the value 1.03. From the film
reel, he was able to determine many values of r
and the corresponding values of t . For example,
he found that after 25.0 ms, the fireball had a
86. 87. 89. 1 • Chapter Review 39
pound-mass unit, what is its percent
uncertainty? (b) Based on that percent
uncertainty, what mass in pound-mass has an
uncertainty of 1 kg when converted to
kilograms?
The length and width of a rectangular room are
measured to be 3.955 ± 0.005 m and 3.050 ±
0.005 m. Calculate the area of the room and its
uncertainty in square meters.
A car engine moves a piston with a circular
cross-section of 7.500 ± 0.002 cm in diameter a
distance of 3.250 ± 0.001 cm to compress the
gas in the cylinder. (a) By what amount is the gas
decreased in volume in cubic centimeters? (b)
Find the uncertainty in this volume.
radius of 130.0 m. Use these values, along with
an average air density of 1.25 kg/m3, to
calculate the initial energy release of the Trinity
detonation in joules (J). (Hint : To get energy in
joules, you need to make sure all the numbers
you substitute in are expressed in terms of SI
base units.) (c) The energy released in large
explosions is often cited in units of “tons of TNT”
(abbreviated “t TNT”), where 1 t TNT is about
4.2 GJ. Convert your answer to (b) into kilotons
of TNT (that is, kt TNT). Compare your answer
with the quick-and-dirty estimate of 10 kt TNT
made by physicist Enrico Fermi shortly after
witnessing the explosion from what was thought
to be a safe distance. (Reportedly, Fermi made
his estimate by dropping some shredded bits of
paper right before the remnants of the shock
wave hit him and looked to see how far they
were carried by it.)
The purpose of this problem is to show the
entire concept of dimensional consistency can
be summarized by the old saying “You can’t add
apples and oranges.” If you have studied power
series expansions in a calculus course, you know
the standard mathematical functions such as
trigonometric functions, logarithms, and
exponential functions can be expressed as
infinite sums of the form
∞
where the are dimensionless constants for all
and x is the argument of the
40 1 • Chapter Review
function. (If you have not studied power series in
calculus yet, just trust us.) Use this fact to
explain why the requirement that all terms in an
equation have the same dimensions is sufficient
as a definition of dimensional consistency. That
is, it actually implies the arguments of standard
mathematical functions must be dimensionless,
so it is not really necessary to make this latter
condition a separate requirement of the
definition of dimensional consistency as we have
done in this section.
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 2
Vectors
FIGURE 2.1 A signpost gives information about distances and directions to towns or to other locations relative to the location of the
signpost. Distance is a scalar quantity. Knowing the distance alone is not enough to get to the town; we must also know the direction from
the signpost to the town. The direction, together with the distance, is a vector quantity commonly called the displacement vector. A
signpost, therefore, gives information about displacement vectors from the signpost to towns. (credit: modification of work by "studio
tdes"/Flickr, thedailyenglishshow.com)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1 Scalars and Vectors
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
2.3 Algebra of Vectors
2.4 Products of Vectors
INTRODUCTION
Vectors are essential to physics and engineering. Many fundamental physical quantities are
vectors, including displacement, velocity, force, and electric and magnetic vector fields. Scalar products of vectors
define other fundamental scalar physical quantities, such as energy. Vector products of vectors define still other
fundamental vector physical quantities, such as torque and angular momentum. In other words, vectors are a
component part of physics in much the same way as sentences are a component part of literature.
In introductory physics, vectors are Euclidean quantities that have geometric representations as arrows in one
dimension (in a line), in two dimensions (in a plane), or in three dimensions (in space). They can be added,
subtracted, or multiplied. In this chapter, we explore elements of vector algebra for applications in mechanics and in
electricity and magnetism. Vector operations also have numerous generalizations in other branches of physics.
42 2 • Vectors
2.1 Scalars and Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the difference between vector and scalar quantities.
• Identify the magnitude and direction of a vector.
• Explain the effect of multiplying a vector quantity by a scalar.
• Describe how one-dimensional vector quantities are added or subtracted.
• Explain the geometric construction for the addition or subtraction of vectors in a plane.
• Distinguish between a vector equation and a scalar equation.
Many familiar physical quantities can be specified completely by giving a single number and the appropriate unit.
For example, “a class period lasts 50 min” or “the gas tank in my car holds 65 L” or “the distance between two posts
is 100 m.” A physical quantity that can be specified completely in this manner is called a scalar quantity. Scalar is a
synonym of “number.” Time, mass, distance, length, volume, temperature, and energy are examples of scalar
quantities.
Scalar quantities that have the same physical units can be added or subtracted according to the usual rules of
algebra for numbers. For example, a class ending 10 min earlier than 50 min lasts .
Similarly, a 60-cal serving of corn followed by a 200-cal serving of donuts gives of
energy. When we multiply a scalar quantity by a number, we obtain the same scalar quantity but with a larger (or
smaller) value. For example, if yesterday’s breakfast had 200 cal of energy and today’s breakfast has four times as
much energy as it had yesterday, then today’s breakfast has of energy. Two scalar quantities
can also be multiplied or divided by each other to form a derived scalar quantity. For example, if a train covers a
distance of 100 km in 1.0 h, its speed is 100.0 km/1.0 h = 27.8 m/s, where the speed is a derived scalar quantity
obtained by dividing distance by time.
Many physical quantities, however, cannot be described completely by just a single number of physical units. For
example, when the U.S. Coast Guard dispatches a ship or a helicopter for a rescue mission, the rescue team must
know not only the distance to the distress signal, but also the direction from which the signal is coming so they can
get to its origin as quickly as possible. Physical quantities specified completely by giving a number of units
(magnitude) and a direction are called vector quantities. Examples of vector quantities include displacement,
velocity, position, force, and torque. In the language of mathematics, physical vector quantities are represented by
mathematical objects called vectors (Figure 2.2). We can add or subtract two vectors, and we can multiply a vector
by a scalar or by another vector, but we cannot divide by a vector. The operation of division by a vector is not
defined.
FIGURE 2.2 We draw a vector from the initial point or origin (called the “tail” of a vector) to the end or terminal point (called the “head” of a
vector), marked by an arrowhead. Magnitude is the length of a vector and is always a positive scalar quantity. (credit "photo": modification
of work by Cate Sevilla)
Let’s examine vector algebra using a graphical method to be aware of basic terms and to develop a qualitative
understanding. In practice, however, when it comes to solving physics problems, we use analytical methods, which
we’ll see in the next section. Analytical methods are more simple computationally and more accurate than graphical
methods. From now on, to distinguish between a vector and a scalar quantity, we adopt the common convention
that a letter in bold type with an arrow above it denotes a vector, and a letter without an arrow denotes a scalar. For
example, a distance of 2.0 km, which is a scalar quantity, is denoted by d= 2.0 km, whereas a displacement of 2.0
Access for free at openstax.org
2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 43
km in some direction, which is a vector quantity, is denoted by .
Suppose you tell a friend on a camping trip that you have discovered a terrific fishing hole 6 km from your tent. It is
unlikely your friend would be able to find the hole easily unless you also communicate the direction in which it can
be found with respect to your campsite. You may say, for example, “Walk about 6 km northeast from my tent.” The
key concept here is that you have to give not one but two pieces of information—namely, the distance or magnitude
(6 km) andthe direction (northeast).
Displacement is a general term used to describe a chang e in position, such as during a trip from the tent to the
fishing hole. Displacement is an example of a vector quantity. If you walk from the tent (location A ) to the hole
(location B ), as shown in Figure 2.3, the vector , representing your displacement, is drawn as the arrow that
originates at point Aand ends at point B . The arrowhead marks the end of the vector. The direction of the
displacement vector is the direction of the arrow. The length of the arrow represents the magnitude Dof vector
. Here, D= 6 km. Since the magnitude of a vector is its length, which is a positive number, the magnitude is also
indicated by placing the absolute value notation around the symbol that denotes the vector; so, we can write
equivalently that . To solve a vector problem graphically, we need to draw the vector to scale. For
example, if we assume 1 unit of distance (1 km) is represented in the drawing by a line segment of length u = 2 cm,
then the total displacement in this example is represented by a vector of length , as
shown in Figure 2.4. Notice that here, to avoid confusion, we used to denote the magnitude of the actual
displacement and d= 12 cm to denote the length of its representation in the drawing.
FIGURE 2.3 The displacement vector from point A(the initial position at the campsite) to point B(the final position at the fishing hole) is
indicated by an arrow with origin at point Aand end at point B . The displacement is the same for any of the actual paths (dashed curves)
that may be taken between points Aand B .
FIGURE 2.4 A displacement displacement (which in this case is 1 km).
of magnitude 6 km is drawn to scale as a vector of length 12 cm when the length of 2 cm represents 1 unit of
Suppose your friend walks from the campsite at Ato the fishing pond at Band then walks back: from the fishing
pond at Bto the campsite at A . The magnitude of the displacement vector from Ato Bis the same as the
magnitude of the displacement vector from Bto A(it equals 6 km in both cases), so we can write
44 2 • Vectors
. However, vector is notequal to vector because these two vectors have different
directions: . In Figure 2.3, vector would be represented by a vector with an origin at point Band
an end at point A , indicating vector points to the southwest, which is exactly opposite to the direction of
vector . We say that vector is antiparallel to vector and write , where the minus sign
indicates the antiparallel direction.
Two vectors that have identical directions are said to be parallel vectors—meaning, they are paral lelto each other.
Two parallel vectors and are equal, denoted by , if and only if they have equal magnitudes vectors with directions perpendicular to each other are said to be orthogonal vectors. These relations between
vectors are illustrated in Figure 2.5.
. Two
because they have different directions (are not parallel); here, their directions differ by
FIGURE 2.5 Various relations between two vectors and . (a) because . (b) because they are not parallel and
. (c) because they have different directions (even though . (d) because they are parallel andhave
identical magnitudes A= B . (e) —meaning, they are orthogonal.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.1
Two motorboats named Alice and Bobare moving on a lake. Given the information about their velocity vectors in
each of the following situations, indicate whether their velocity vectors are equal or otherwise. (a) Alice moves north
at 6 knots and Bobmoves west at 6 knots. (b) Alice moves west at 6 knots and Bobmoves west at 3 knots. (c) Alice
moves northeast at 6 knots and Bobmoves south at 3 knots. (d) Alice moves northeast at 6 knots and Bobmoves
southwest at 6 knots. (e) Alice moves northeast at 2 knots and Bobmoves closer to the shore northeast at 2 knots.
Algebra of Vectors in One Dimension
Vectors can be multiplied by scalars, added to other vectors, or subtracted from other vectors. We can illustrate
these vector concepts using an example of the fishing trip seen in Figure 2.6.
Access for free at openstax.org
2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 45
FIGURE 2.6 Displacement vectors for a fishing trip. (a) Stopping to rest at point Cwhile walking from camp (point A ) to the pond (point B ).
(b) Going back for the dropped tackle box (point D ). (c) Finishing up at the fishing pond.
Suppose your friend departs from point A(the campsite) and walks in the direction to point B(the fishing pond), but,
along the way, stops to rest at some point Clocated three-quarters of the distance between Aand B , beginning from
point A(Figure 2.6(a)). What is his displacement vector when he reaches point C ? We know that if he walks all
the way to B , his displacement vector relative to Ais , which has magnitude and a direction of
northeast. If he walks only a 0.75 fraction of the total distance, maintaining the northeasterly direction, at point Che
must be away from the campsite at A . So, his displacement vector at the rest point Chas
magnitude and is parallel to the displacement vector . All of this can be stated
succinctly in the form of the following vector equation:
In a vector equation, both sides of the equation are vectors. The previous equation is an example of a vector
multiplied by a positive scalar (number) . The result, , of such a multiplication is a new vector with a
direction parallel to the direction of the original vector .
In general, when a vector is multiplied by a positive scalar , the result is a new vector that is paral lelto :
2.1
The magnitude expressed by the scalar equation:
of this new vector is obtained by multiplying the magnitude of the original vector, as
2.2
In a scalar equation, both sides of the equation are numbers. Equation 2.2 is a scalar equation because the
magnitudes of vectors are scalar quantities (and positive numbers). If the scalar is neg ative in the vector equation
Equation 2.1, then the magnitude of the new vector is still given by Equation 2.2, but the direction of the new
vector is antiparal lelto the direction of . These principles are illustrated in Figure 2.7(a) by two examples where
the length of vector is 1.5 units. When , the new vector has length long as the original vector) and is parallel to the original vector. When , the new vector (twice as
has length
(twice as long as the original vector) and is antiparallel to the original vector.
46 2 • Vectors
is called the resul tantof
FIGURE 2.7 Algebra of vectors in one dimension. (a) Multiplication by a scalar. (b) Addition of two vectors vectors and . (c) Subtraction of two vectors is the difference of vectors and .
Now suppose your fishing buddy departs from point A(the campsite), walking in the direction to point B(the fishing
hole), but he realizes he lost his tackle box when he stopped to rest at point C(located three-quarters of the
distance between Aand B , beginning from point A ). So, he turns back and retraces his steps in the direction toward
the campsite and finds the box lying on the path at some point Donly 1.2 km away from point C(see Figure 2.6(b)).
What is his displacement vector when he finds the box at point D ? What is his displacement vector point Dto the hole? We have already established that at rest point Chis displacement vector is .
Starting at point C , he walks southwest (toward the campsite), which means his new displacement vector point Cto point Dis antiparallel to . Its magnitude is , so his second
displacement vector is the two displacement vectors: vector point to the point where he finds his box):
. His total displacement relative to the campsite is the vector sum of
(from the campsite to the rest point) and vector (from the rest
from
from
2.3
The vector sum of two (or more) vectors is called the resultant vector or, for short, the resul tant . When the vectors
on the right-hand-side of Equation 2.3 are known, we can find the resultant as follows:
2.4
When your friend finally reaches the pond at B , his displacement vector displacement vector from point Ato point Dand his displacement vector (see Figure 2.6(c)). This means his displacement vector from point Ais the vector sum of his
from point Dto the fishing hole:
is the difference of two
vectors:
2.5
Notice that a difference of two vectors is nothing more than a vector sum of two vectors because the second term in
(which is antiparallel to . When we substitute Equation 2.4 into Equation 2.5, we
Equation 2.5 is vector obtain the second displacement vector:
2.6
This result means your friend walked tackle box to the fishing hole.
from the point where he finds his
When vectors and and their difference lie along a line (that is, in one dimension), such as in the camping example, their resultant
both lie along the same direction. We can illustrate the addition or
Access for free at openstax.org
2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 47
subtraction of vectors by drawing the corresponding vectors to scale in one dimension, as shown in Figure 2.7.
To illustrate the resultant when and are two parallel vectors, we draw them along one line by placing the origin
of one vector at the end of the other vector in head-to-tail fashion (see Figure 2.7(b)). The magnitude of this
resultant is the sum of their magnitudes: R= A+ B . The direction of the resultant is parallel to both vectors. When
vector is antiparallel to vector , we draw them along one line in either head-to-head fashion (Figure 2.7(c)) or
tail-to-tail fashion. The magnitude of the vector difference, then, is the absolut e value of the
difference of their magnitudes. The direction of the difference vector is parallel to the direction of the longer
vector.
In general, in one dimension—as well as in higher dimensions, such as in a plane or in space—we can add any
number of vectors and we can do so in any order because the addition of vectors is commutative,
2.7
and associative,
2.8
Moreover, multiplication by a scalar is distributive:
2.9
We used the distributive property in Equation 2.4 and Equation 2.6.
When adding many vectors in one dimension, it is convenient to use the concept of a unit vector. A unit vector,
which is denoted by a letter symbol with a hat, such as , has a magnitude of one and does not have any physical
unit so that . The only role of a unit vector is to specify direction. For example, instead of saying vector
has a magnitude of 6.0 km and a direction of northeast, we can introduce a unit vector that points to the
northeast and say succinctly that . Then the southwesterly direction is simply given by the unit
vector . In this way, the displacement of 6.0 km in the southwesterly direction is expressed by the vector
EXAMPLE 2.1
A Ladybug Walker
A long measuring stick rests against a wall in a physics laboratory with its 200-cm end at the floor. A ladybug lands
on the 100-cm mark and crawls randomly along the stick. It first walks 15 cm toward the floor, then it walks 56 cm
toward the wall, then it walks 3 cm toward the floor again. Then, after a brief stop, it continues for 25 cm toward the
floor and then, again, it crawls up 19 cm toward the wall before coming to a complete rest (Figure 2.8). Find the
vector of its total displacement and its final resting position on the stick.
Strategy
the floor is If we choose the direction along the stick toward the floor as the direction of unit vector , then the direction toward
and the direction toward the wall is . The ladybug makes a total of five displacements:
48 2 • Vectors
The total displacement is the resultant of all its displacement vectors.
FIGURE 2.8 Five displacements of the ladybug. Note that in this schematic drawing, magnitudes of displacements are not drawn to scale.
(credit "ladybug": modification of work by “Persian Poet Gal”/Wikimedia Commons)
Solution
The resultant of all the displacement vectors is
In this calculation, we use the distributive law given by Equation 2.9. The result reads that the total displacement
vector points away from the 100-cm mark (initial landing site) toward the end of the meter stick that touches the
wall. The end that touches the wall is marked 0 cm, so the final position of the ladybug is at the (100 – 32)cm =
68-cm mark.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.2
A cave diver enters a long underwater tunnel. When her displacement with respect to the entry point is 20 m, she
accidentally drops her camera, but she doesn’t notice it missing until she is some 6 m farther into the tunnel. She
swims back 10 m but cannot find the camera, so she decides to end the dive. How far from the entry point is she?
Taking the positive direction out of the tunnel, what is her displacement vector relative to the entry point?
Algebra of Vectors in Two Dimensions
When vectors lie in a plane—that is, when they are in two dimensions—they can be multiplied by scalars, added to
other vectors, or subtracted from other vectors in accordance with the general laws expressed by Equation 2.1,
Equation 2.2, Equation 2.7, and Equation 2.8. However, the addition rule for two vectors in a plane becomes more
complicated than the rule for vector addition in one dimension. We have to use the laws of geometry to construct
resultant vectors, followed by trigonometry to find vector magnitudes and directions. This geometric approach is
commonly used in navigation (Figure 2.9). In this section, we need to have at hand two rulers, a triangle, a
protractor, a pencil, and an eraser for drawing vectors to scale by geometric constructions.
Access for free at openstax.org
2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 49
FIGURE 2.9 In navigation, the laws of geometry are used to draw resultant displacements on nautical maps.
For a geometric construction of the sum of two vectors in a plane, we follow the parallelogram rule. Suppose two
vectors and are at the arbitrary positions shown in Figure 2.10. Translate either one of them in parallel to the
beginning of the other vector, so that after the translation, both vectors have their origins at the same point. Now, at
the end of vector we draw a line parallel to vector and at the end of vector we draw a line parallel to vector
(the dashed lines in Figure 2.10). In this way, we obtain a parallelogram. From the origin of the two vectors we draw
a diagonal that is the resultant of the two vectors: (Figure 2.10(a)). The other diagonal of this
parallelogram is the vector difference of the two vectors , as shown in Figure 2.10(b). Notice that the end
of the difference vector is placed at the end of vector .
FIGURE 2.10 The parallelogram rule for the addition of two vectors. Make the parallel translation of each vector to a point where their
origins (marked by the dot) coincide and construct a parallelogram with two sides on the vectors and the other two sides (indicated by
dashed lines) parallel to the vectors. (a) Draw the resultant vector along the diagonal of the parallelogram from the common point to the
opposite corner. Length Rof the resultant vector is notequal to the sum of the magnitudes of the two vectors. (b) Draw the difference
vector along the diagonal connecting the ends of the vectors. Place the origin of vector at the end of vector and the end
(arrowhead) of vector at the end of vector . Length Dof the difference vector is notequal to the difference of magnitudes of the two
vectors.
It follows from the parallelogram rule that neither the magnitude of the resultant vector nor the magnitude of the
difference vector can be expressed as a simple sum or difference of magnitudes Aand B , because the length of a
diagonal cannot be expressed as a simple sum of side lengths. When using a geometric construction to find
magnitudes and , we have to use trigonometry laws for triangles, which may lead to complicated algebra.
There are two ways to circumvent this algebraic complexity. One way is to use the method of components, which we
examine in the next section. The other way is to draw the vectors to scale, as is done in navigation, and read
approximate vector lengths and angles (directions) from the graphs. In this section we examine the second
approach.
50 2 • Vectors
If we need to add three or more vectors, we repeat the parallelogram rule for the pairs of vectors until we find the
resultant of all of the resultants. For three vectors, for example, we first find the resultant of vector 1 and vector 2,
and then we find the resultant of this resultant and vector 3. The order in which we select the pairs of vectors does
not matter because the operation of vector addition is commutative and associative (see Equation 2.7 and Equation
2.8). Before we state a general rule that follows from repetitive applications of the parallelogram rule, let’s look at
the following example.
Suppose you plan a vacation trip in Florida. Departing from Tallahassee, the state capital, you plan to visit your uncle
Joe in Jacksonville, see your cousin Vinny in Daytona Beach, stop for a little fun in Orlando, see a circus performance
in Tampa, and visit the University of Florida in Gainesville. Your route may be represented by five displacement
vectors , , , and , which are indicated by the red vectors in Figure 2.11. What is your total displacement
when you reach Gainesville? The total displacement is the vector sum of all five displacement vectors, which may be
found by using the parallelogram rule four times. Alternatively, recall that the displacement vector has its beginning
at the initial position (Tallahassee) and its end at the final position (Gainesville), so the total displacement vector can
be drawn directly as an arrow connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville (see the green vector in Figure 2.11). When
we use the parallelogram rule four times, the resultant we obtain is exactly this green vector connecting
Tallahassee with Gainesville: .
FIGURE 2.11 When we use the parallelogram rule four times, we obtain the resultant vector vector connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville.
Drawing the resultant vector of many vectors can be generalized by using the following tail-to-head geometric
construction. Suppose we want to draw the resultant vector of four vectors , , , and (Figure 2.12(a)). We
select any one of the vectors as the first vector and make a parallel translation of a second vector to a position
where the origin (“tail”) of the second vector coincides with the end (“head”) of the first vector. Then, we select a
third vector and make a parallel translation of the third vector to a position where the origin of the third vector
coincides with the end of the second vector. We repeat this procedure until all the vectors are in a head-to-tail
, which is the green
Access for free at openstax.org
2.1 • Scalars and Vectors 51
arrangement like the one shown in Figure 2.12. We draw the resultant vector by connecting the origin (“tail”) of
the first vector with the end (“head”) of the last vector. The end of the resultant vector is at the end of the last vector.
Because the addition of vectors is associative and commutative, we obtain the same resultant vector regardless of
which vector we choose to be first, second, third, or fourth in this construction.
FIGURE 2.12 Tail-to-head method for drawing the resultant vector . (a) Four vectors of different magnitudes and
directions. (b) Vectors in (a) are translated to new positions where the origin (“tail”) of one vector is at the end (“head”) of another vector.
The resultant vector is drawn from the origin (“tail”) of the first vector to the end (“head”) of the last vector in this arrangement.
EXAMPLE 2.2
Geometric Construction of the Resultant
The three displacement vectors , , and in Figure 2.13 are specified by their magnitudes A= 10.0, B= 7.0, and
C= 8.0, respectively, and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction , , and
. The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Choose a convenient scale and use a ruler and a
protractor to find the following vector sums: (a) , (b) (c) .
FIGURE 2.13 Vectors used in Example 2.2 and in the Check Your Understanding feature that follows.
Strategy
In geometric construction, to find a vector means to find its magnitude and its direction angle with the horizontal
direction. The strategy is to draw to scale the vectors that appear on the right-hand side of the equation and
construct the resultant vector. Then, use a ruler and a protractor to read the magnitude of the resultant and the
direction angle. For parts (a) and (b) we use the parallelogram rule. For (c) we use the tail-to-head method.
Solution
For parts (a) and (b), we attach the origin of vector to the origin of vector , as shown in Figure 2.14, and
construct a parallelogram. The shorter diagonal of this parallelogram is the sum . The longer of the diagonals
is the difference . We use a ruler to measure the lengths of the diagonals, and a protractor to measure the
angles with the horizontal. For the resultant , we obtain R= 5.8 cm and . For the difference , we obtain D
= 16.2 cm and , which are shown in Figure 2.14.
52 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.14 Using the parallelogram rule to solve (a) (finding the resultant, red) and (b) (finding the difference, blue).
For (c), we can start with vector and draw the remaining vectors tail-to-head as shown in Figure 2.15. In vector
addition, the order in which we draw the vectors is unimportant, but drawing the vectors to scale is very important.
Next, we draw vector from the origin of the first vector to the end of the last vector and place the arrowhead at the
end of . We use a ruler to measure the length of , and find that its magnitude is
S= 36.9 cm. We use a protractor and find that its direction angle is . This solution is shown in Figure
2.15.
FIGURE 2.15 Using the tail-to-head method to solve (c) (finding vector , green).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.3
Using the three displacement vectors protractor to find vector , , and in Figure 2.13, choose a convenient scale, and use a ruler and a
given by the vector equation .
INTERACTIVE
Observe the addition of vectors in a plane by visiting this vector calculator (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21compveccalc),
Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 53
and by engaging the Phet simulation below.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/2-1-scalars-and-
vectors)
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe vectors in two and three dimensions in terms of their components, using unit vectors along the
axes.
• Distinguish between the vector components of a vector and the scalar components of a vector.
• Explain how the magnitude of a vector is defined in terms of the components of a vector.
• Identify the direction angle of a vector in a plane.
• Explain the connection between polar coordinates and Cartesian coordinates in a plane.
Vectors are usually described in terms of their components in a coordinate system. Even in everyday life we
naturally invoke the concept of vector components in a rectangular coordinate system. For example, if you ask
someone for directions to a particular location, you will more likely be told to go 40 km east and 30 km north than
50 km in the direction north of east.
In a rectangular (Cartesian) xy-coordinate system in a plane, a point in a plane is described by a pair of coordinates
(x, y). In a similar fashion, a vector in a plane is described by a pair of its vect or coordinates. The x-coordinate of
vector is called its x-component and the y-coordinate of vector is called its y-component. The vector
x-component is a vector denoted by . The vector y-component is a vector denoted by . In the Cartesian
system, the x and y vector components of a vector are the orthogonal projections, as illustrated in Figure 2.16, of
this vector onto the x- and y-axes, respectively. In this way, following the parallelogram rule for vector addition,
each vector on a Cartesian plane can be expressed as the vector sum of its vector components:
2.10
As illustrated in Figure 2.16, vector to the x-axis and the y-component component .
is the diagonal of the rectangle where the x-component is the side parallel to the y-axis. Vector component is the side parallel
is orthogonal to vector
FIGURE 2.16 Vector in a plane in the Cartesian coordinate system is the vector sum of its vector x- and y-components. The x-vector
component is the orthogonal projection of vector onto the x-axis. The y-vector component is the orthogonal projection of vector
onto the y-axis. The numbers and that multiply the unit vectors are the scalar components of the vector.
It is customary to denote the positive direction on the x-axis by the unit vector and the positive direction on the
54 2 • Vectors
y-axis by the unit vector . Unit vectors of the axes, and , define two orthogonal directions in the plane. As
shown in Figure 2.16, the x- and y- components of a vector can now be written in terms of the unit vectors of the
axes:
2.11
The vectors and defined by Equation 2.11 are the vect or components of vector that define the vector components in Equation 2.11 are the scalar components of vector 2.10 with Equation 2.11, we obtain the component form of a vector:
. The numbers and
. Combining Equation
2.12
If we know the coordinates coordinates of the origin point of a vector (where bstands for “beginning”) and the
of the end point of a vector (where e stands for “end”), we can obtain the scalar components
of a vector simply by subtracting the origin point coordinates from the end point coordinates:
2.13
EXAMPLE 2.3
Displacement of a Mouse Pointer
A mouse pointer on the display monitor of a computer at its initial position is at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) with respect
to the lower left-side corner. If you move the pointer to an icon located at point (2.0 cm, 4.5 cm), what is the
displacement vector of the pointer?
Strategy
The origin of the xy-coordinate system is the lower left-side corner of the computer monitor. Therefore, the unit
vector on the x-axis points horizontally to the right and the unit vector on the y-axis points vertically upward. The
origin of the displacement vector is located at point b(6.0, 1.6) and the end of the displacement vector is located at
point e(2.0, 4.5). Substitute the coordinates of these points into Equation 2.13 to find the scalar components
and of the displacement vector . Finally, substitute the coordinates into Equation 2.12 to write the
displacement vector in the vector component form.
Solution
We identify , , , and y-components of the displacement vector are
, where the physical unit is 1 cm. The scalar x- and
The vector component form of the displacement vector is
2.14
This solution is shown in Figure 2.17.
Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 55
FIGURE 2.17 The graph of the displacement vector. The vector points from the origin point at bto the end point at e.
Significance
Notice that the physical unit—here, 1 cm—can be placed either with each component immediately before the unit
vector or globally for both components, as in Equation 2.14. Often, the latter way is more convenient because it is
simpler.
The vector x-component of the displacement vector has the magnitude
because the magnitude of the unit vector is . Notice, too, that the direction of the
x-component is , which is antiparallel to the direction of the +x-axis; hence, the x-component vector the left, as shown in Figure 2.17. The scalar x-component of vector is .
Similarly, the vector y-component of the displacement vector has magnitude
because the magnitude of the unit vector is . The direction of the y-component is , which is parallel to the
direction of the +y-axis. Therefore, the y-component vector y-component of vector is . The displacement vector points up, as seen in Figure 2.17. The scalar
is the resultant of its two vect or components.
The vector component form of the displacement vector Equation 2.14 tells us that the mouse pointer has been
moved on the monitor 4.0 cm to the left and 2.9 cm upward from its initial position.
points to
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.4
A blue fly lands on a sheet of graph paper at a point located 10.0 cm to the right of its left edge and 8.0 cm above its
bottom edge and walks slowly to a point located 5.0 cm from the left edge and 5.0 cm from the bottom edge.
Choose the rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the lower left-side corner of the paper and find the
displacement vector of the fly. Illustrate your solution by graphing.
When we know the scalar components and of a vector , we can find its magnitude Aand its direction angle
. The direction angle—or direction, for short—is the angle the vector forms with the positive direction on the
x-axis. The angle is measured in the count erclockwise direction from the +x-axis to the vector (Figure 2.18).
Because the lengths A , , and form a right triangle, they are related by the Pythagorean theorem:
2.15
This equation works even if the scalar components of a vector are negative. The direction angle of a vector is
56 2 • Vectors
defined via the tangent function of angle in the triangle shown in Figure 2.18:
2.16
is positive (Figure 2.19), the
FIGURE 2.18 When the vector lies either in the first quadrant or in the fourth quadrant, where component direction angle in Equation 2.16) is identical to the angle .
When the vector lies either in the first quadrant or in the fourth quadrant, where component is positive (Figure
2.19), the angle in Equation 2.16 is identical to the direction angle . For vectors in the fourth quadrant, angle
is negative, which means that for these vectors, direction angle is measured clockwise from the positive x-axis.
Similarly, for vectors in the second quadrant, angle is negative. When the vector lies in either the second or third
quadrant, where component is negative, the direction angle is (Figure 2.19).
FIGURE 2.19 Scalar components of a vector may be positive or negative. Vectors in the first quadrant (I) have both scalar components
positive and vectors in the third quadrant have both scalar components negative. For vectors in quadrants II and III, the direction angle of a
vector is .
EXAMPLE 2.4
Magnitude and Direction of the Displacement Vector
You move a mouse pointer on the display monitor from its initial position at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) to an icon located
Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 57
at point (2.0 cm, 4.5 cm). What are the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector of the pointer?
Strategy
In Example 2.3, we found the displacement vector components and magnitude Dand direction , respectively.
Solution
The magnitude of vector is
of the mouse pointer (see Equation 2.14). We identify its scalar
and substitute into Equation 2.15 and Equation 2.16 to find the
The direction angle is
Vector lies in the second quadrant, so its direction angle is
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.5
If the displacement vector of a blue fly walking on a sheet of graph paper is magnitude and direction.
, find its
In many applications, the magnitudes and directions of vector quantities are known and we need to find the
resultant of many vectors. For example, imagine 400 cars moving on the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco in a
strong wind. Each car gives the bridge a different push in various directions and we would like to know how big the
resultant push can possibly be. We have already gained some experience with the geometric construction of vector
sums, so we know the task of finding the resultant by drawing the vectors and measuring their lengths and angles
may become intractable pretty quickly, leading to huge errors. Worries like this do not appear when we use
analytical methods. The very first step in an analytical approach is to find vector components when the direction and
magnitude of a vector are known.
Let us return to the right triangle in Figure 2.18. The quotient of the adjacent side cosine function of direction angle , , and the quotient of the opposite side is the sine function of , . When magnitude Aand direction relations for the scalar components:
to the hypotenuse Ais the
to the hypotenuse A
are known, we can solve these
2.17
When calculating vector components with Equation 2.17, care must be taken with the angle. The direction angle
of a vector is the angle measured count erclockwise from the positive direction on the x-axis to the vector. The
clockwise measurement gives a negative angle.
EXAMPLE 2.5
Components of Displacement Vectors
A rescue party for a missing child follows a search dog named Trooper. Trooper wanders a lot and makes many trial
sniffs along many different paths. Trooper eventually finds the child and the story has a happy ending, but his
displacements on various legs seem to be truly convoluted. On one of the legs he walks 200.0 m southeast, then he
58 2 • Vectors
runs north some 300.0 m. On the third leg, he examines the scents carefully for 50.0 m in the direction north. On the fourth leg, Trooper goes directly south for 80.0 m, picks up a fresh scent and turns west of
west of south
for 150.0 m. Find the scalar components of Trooper’s displacement vectors and his displacement vectors in vector
component form for each leg.
Strategy
Let’s adopt a rectangular coordinate system with the positive x-axis in the direction of geographic east, with the
positive y-direction pointed to geographic north. Explicitly, the unit vector of the x-axis points east and the unit
vector of the y-axis points north. Trooper makes five legs, so there are five displacement vectors. We start by
identifying their magnitudes and direction angles, then we use Equation 2.17 to find the scalar components of the
displacements and Equation 2.12 for the displacement vectors.
Solution
On the first leg, the displacement magnitude is we can take either measured clockwise from the east direction or the east direction. With the first choice, . With the second choice, and the direction is southeast. For direction angle
measured counterclockwise from
. We can use either one of
these two angles. The components are
The displacement vector of the first leg is
On the second leg of Trooper’s wanderings, the magnitude of the displacement is north. The direction angle is . We obtain the following results:
and the direction is
On the third leg, the displacement magnitude is angle measured counterclockwise from the eastern direction is answers:
and the direction is west of north. The direction
. This gives the following
On the fourth leg of the excursion, the displacement magnitude is direction angle can be taken as either and the direction is south. The
or . We obtain
On the last leg, the magnitude is which gives
and the angle is west of south),
Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 59
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.6
If Trooper runs 20 m west before taking a rest, what is his displacement vector?
Polar Coordinates
To describe locations of points or vectors in a plane, we need two orthogonal directions. In the Cartesian coordinate
system these directions are given by unit vectors and along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively. The Cartesian
coordinate system is very convenient to use in describing displacements and velocities of objects and the forces
acting on them. However, it becomes cumbersome when we need to describe the rotation of objects. When
describing rotation, we usually work in the polar coordinate system.
In the polar coordinate system, the location of point Pin a plane is given by two polar coordinates (Figure 2.20).
The first polar coordinate is the radial coordinate r, which is the distance of point Pfrom the origin. The second
polar coordinate is an angle that the radial vector makes with some chosen direction, usually the positive
x-direction. In polar coordinates, angles are measured in radians, or rads. The radial vector is attached at the origin
and points away from the origin to point P . This radial direction is described by a unit radial vector . The second unit
vector is a vector orthogonal to the radial direction . The positive direction indicates how the angle changes
in the counterclockwise direction. In this way, a point Pthat has coordinates (x, y) in the rectangular system can be
described equivalently in the polar coordinate system by the two polar coordinates . Equation 2.17 is valid for
any vector, so we can use it to express the x- and y-coordinates of vector . In this way, we obtain the connection
between the polar coordinates and rectangular coordinates of point P :
2.18
FIGURE 2.20 Using polar coordinates, the unit vector it, the unit vector defines the positive direction of rotation by the angle .
defines the positive direction along the radius r (radial direction) and, orthogonal to
EXAMPLE 2.6
Polar Coordinates
A treasure hunter finds one silver coin at a location 20.0 m away from a dry well in the direction and finds one gold coin at a location 10.0 m away from the well in the direction and rectangular coordinates of these findings with respect to the well?
north of east
north of west. What are the polar
60 2 • Vectors
Strategy
The well marks the origin of the coordinate system and east is the +x-direction. We identify radial distances from the
locations to the origin, which are (for the silver coin) and (for the gold coin). To find the
angular coordinates, we convert to radians: . We use Equation 2.18 to find the x- and
y-coordinates of the coins.
Solution
The angular coordinate of the silver coin is , whereas the angular coordinate of the gold coin is
. Hence, the polar coordinates of the silver coin are and those of the
. We substitute these coordinates into Equation 2.18 to obtain rectangular
gold coin are coordinates. For the gold coin, the coordinates are
For the silver coin, the coordinates are
Vectors in Three Dimensions
To specify the location of a point in space, we need three coordinates (x, y, z), where coordinates x and y specify
locations in a plane, and coordinate z gives a vertical position above or below the plane. Three-dimensional space
has three orthogonal directions, so we need not two but three unit vectors to define a three-dimensional coordinate
system. In the Cartesian coordinate system, the first two unit vectors are the unit vector of the x-axis and the unit
vector of the y-axis . The third unit vector is the direction of the z-axis (Figure 2.21). The order in which the axes
are labeled, which is the order in which the three unit vectors appear, is important because it defines the orientation
of the coordinate system. The order x-y-z, which is equivalent to the order - - , defines the standard right-
handed coordinate system (positive orientation). Notice that while previously the y-axis was used for the upward
direction, in three dimensions we usually choose z to represent the vertical. A right-handed coordinate system with
z up and with one of the remaining axes pointing to the right and the other out of the page must have the y-axis
pointing right and x out of the page, as illustrated here.
FIGURE 2.21 Three unit vectors define a Cartesian system in three-dimensional space. The order in which these unit vectors appear
defines the orientation of the coordinate system. The order shown here defines the right-handed orientation.
Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 • Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector 61
In three-dimensional space, vector has three vector components: the x-component , which is the part
of vector along the x-axis; the y-component , which is the part of along the y-axis; and the
z-component , which is the part of the vector along the z-axis. A vector in three-dimensional space is the
vector sum of its three vector components (Figure 2.22):
2.19
If we know the coordinates of its origin by taking their differences: and and of its end , its scalar components are obtained
are given by Equation 2.13 and the z-component is given by
2.20
Magnitude Ais obtained by generalizing Equation 2.15 to three dimensions:
2.21
This expression for the vector magnitude comes from applying the Pythagorean theorem twice. As seen in Figure
2.22, the diagonal in the xy-plane has length and its square adds to the square to give . Note that
when the z-component is zero, the vector lies entirely in the xy-plane and its description is reduced to two
dimensions.
FIGURE 2.22 A vector in three-dimensional space is the vector sum of its three vector components.
EXAMPLE 2.7
Takeoff of a Drone
During a takeoff of IAI Heron (Figure 2.23), its position with respect to a control tower is 100 m above the ground,
300 m to the east, and 200 m to the north. One minute later, its position is 250 m above the ground, 1200 m to the
east, and 2100 m to the north. What is the drone’s displacement vector with respect to the control tower? What is
the magnitude of its displacement vector?
62 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.23 The drone IAI Heron in flight. (credit: SSgt Reynaldo Ramon, USAF)
Strategy
We take the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system as the control tower. The direction of the +x-axis is given by
unit vector to the east, the direction of the +y-axis is given by unit vector to the north, and the direction of the
+z-axis is given by unit vector , which points up from the ground. The drone’s first position is the origin (or,
equivalently, the beginning) of the displacement vector and its second position is the end of the displacement
vector.
Solution
We identify b (300.0 m, 200.0 m, 100.0 m) and e(1200 m, 2100 m, 250 m), and use Equation 2.13 and Equation
2.20 to find the scalar components of the drone’s displacement vector:
We substitute these components into Equation 2.19 to find the displacement vector:
We substitute into Equation 2.21 to find the magnitude of the displacement:
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.7
If the average velocity vector of the drone in the displacement in Example 2.7 is ,
what is the magnitude of the drone’s velocity vector?
2.3 Algebra of Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply analytical methods of vector algebra to find resultant vectors and to solve vector equations for
unknown vectors.
• Interpret physical situations in terms of vector expressions.
Vectors can be added together and multiplied by scalars. Vector addition is associative (Equation 2.8) and
commutative (Equation 2.7), and vector multiplication by a sum of scalars is distributive (Equation 2.9). Also, scalar
multiplication by a sum of vectors is distributive:
2.22
Access for free at openstax.org
2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 63
In this equation, is any number (a scalar). For example, a vector antiparallel to vector be expressed simply by multiplying by the scalar :
can
2.23
EXAMPLE 2.8
Direction of Motion
In a Cartesian coordinate system where denotes geographic east, denotes geographic north, and denotes
altitude above sea level, a military convoy advances its position through unknown territory with velocity
. If the convoy had to retreat, in what geographic direction would it be moving?
Solution
The velocity vector has the third component , which says the convoy is climbing at a rate of 100
m/h through mountainous terrain. At the same time, its velocity is 4.0 km/h to the east and 3.0 km/h to the north, so
it moves on the ground in direction north of east. If the convoy had to retreat, its new velocity
vector would have to be antiparallel to and be in the form , where is a positive number. Thus, the
velocity of the retreat would be . The negative sign of the third component
indicates the convoy would be descending. The direction angle of the retreat velocity is
south of west. Therefore, the convoy would be moving on the ground in direction south of west while
descending on its way back.
The generalization of the number zero to vector algebra is called the null vector, denoted by the null vector are zero, , so the null vector has no length and no direction.
Two vectors and are equal vectors if and only if their difference is the null vector:
. All components of
This vector equation means we must have simultaneously , , and . Hence,
we can write if and only if the corresponding components of vectors and are equal:
2.24
Two vectors are equal when their corresponding scalar components are equal.
Resolving vectors into their scalar components (i.e., finding their scalar components) and expressing them
analytically in vector component form (given by Equation 2.19) allows us to use vector algebra to find sums or
differences of many vectors anal ytical l y (i.e., without using graphical methods). For example, to find the resultant of
two vectors and , we simply add them component by component, as follows:
In this way, using Equation 2.24, scalar components of the resultant vector corresponding scalar components of vectors and :
are the sums of
64 2 • Vectors
Analytical methods can be used to find components of a resultant of many vectors. For example, if we are to sum up
vectors , where each vector is , the resultant vector is
Therefore, scalar components of the resultant vector are
2.25
Having found the scalar components, we can write the resultant in vector component form:
Analytical methods for finding the resultant and, in general, for solving vector equations are very important in
physics because many physical quantities are vectors. For example, we use this method in kinematics to find
resultant displacement vectors and resultant velocity vectors, in mechanics to find resultant force vectors and the
resultants of many derived vector quantities, and in electricity and magnetism to find resultant electric or magnetic
vector fields.
EXAMPLE 2.9
Analytical Computation of a Resultant
Three displacement vectors , , and in a plane (Figure 2.13) are specified by their magnitudes A= 10.0, B= 7.0,
and C= 8.0, respectively, and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction ,
and . The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Resolve the vectors to their scalar components
and find the following vector sums: (a) , (b) , and (c) .
Strategy
First, we use Equation 2.17 to find the scalar components of each vector and then we express each vector in its
vector component form given by Equation 2.12. Then, we use analytical methods of vector algebra to find the
resultants.
Solution
We resolve the given vectors to their scalar components:
Access for free at openstax.org
2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 65
For (a) we may substitute directly into Equation 2.25 to find the scalar components of the resultant:
Therefore, the resultant vector is .
For (b), we may want to write the vector difference as
Then, the scalar components of the vector difference are
Hence, the difference vector is .
For (c), we can write vector in the following explicit form:
Then, the scalar components of are
The vector is .
Significance
Having found the vector components, we can illustrate the vectors by graphing or we can compute magnitudes and
direction angles, as shown in Figure 2.24. Results for the magnitudes in (b) and (c) can be compared with results for
the same problems obtained with the graphical method, shown in Figure 2.14 and Figure 2.15. Notice that the
analytical method produces exact results and its accuracy is not limited by the resolution of a ruler or a protractor,
as it was with the graphical method used in Example 2.2 for finding this same resultant.
FIGURE 2.24 Graphical illustration of the solutions obtained analytically in Example 2.9.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.8
Three displacement vectors , , and (Figure 2.13) are specified by their magnitudes A= 10.00, B= 7.00, and F=
20.00, respectively, and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction , , and
66 2 • Vectors
. The physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Use the analytical method to find vector
. Verify that
G= 28.15 cm and that .
EXAMPLE 2.10
The Tug-of-War Game
Four dogs named Astro, Balto, Clifford, and Dug play a tug-of-war game with a toy (Figure 2.25). Astro pulls on the
toy in direction south of east, Balto pulls in direction east of north, and Clifford pulls in direction
west of north. Astro pulls strongly with 160.0 units of force (N), which we abbreviate as A= 160.0 N. Balto
pulls even stronger than Astro with a force of magnitude B= 200.0 N, and Clifford pulls with a force of magnitude C
= 140.0 N. When Dug pulls on the toy in such a way that his force balances out the resultant of the other three
forces, the toy does not move in any direction. With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on the toy
for this to happen?
FIGURE 2.25 Four dogs play a tug-of-war game with a toy.
Strategy
We assume that east is the direction of the positive x-axis and north is the direction of the positive y-axis. As in
Example 2.9, we have to resolve the three given forces— (the pull from Astro), (the pull from Balto), and (the
pull from Clifford)—into their scalar components and then find the scalar components of the resultant vector
. When the pulling force from Dug balances out this resultant, the sum of and must give the
. This means that , so the pull from Dug must be antiparallel to .
null vector Solution
The direction angles are , , and , and substituting them
into Equation 2.17 gives the scalar components of the three given forces:
Now we compute scalar components of the resultant vector :
Access for free at openstax.org
2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 67
The antiparallel vector to the resultant is
The magnitude of Dug’s pulling force is
The direction of Dug’s pulling force is
Dug pulls in the direction lies in the third quadrant (Figure 2.19).
south of west because both components are negative, which means the pull vector
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.9
Suppose that Balto in Example 2.10 leaves the game to attend to more important matters, but Astro, Clifford, and
Dug continue playing. Astro and Clifford's pull on the toy does not change, but Dug runs around and bites on the toy
in a different place. With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on the toy now to balance out the
combined pulls from Clifford and Astro? Illustrate this situation by drawing a vector diagram indicating all forces
involved.
EXAMPLE 2.11
Vector Algebra
Find the magnitude of the vector that satisfies the equation .
, where and
Strategy
We first solve the given equation for the unknown vector . Then we substitute and ; group the terms along
each of the three directions , , and ; and identify the scalar components , , and . Finally, we substitute
into Equation 2.21 to find magnitude C .
Solution
The components are , , and , and substituting into Equation 2.21 gives
68 2 • Vectors
EXAMPLE 2.12
Displacement of a Skier
Starting at a ski lodge, a cross-country skier goes 5.0 km north, then 3.0 km west, and finally 4.0 km southwest
before taking a rest. Find their total displacement vector relative to the lodge when they are at the rest point. How
far and in what direction must they ski from the rest point to return directly to the lodge?
Strategy
We assume a rectangular coordinate system with the origin at the ski lodge and with the unit vector pointing east
and the unit vector pointing north. There are three displacements: , , and . We identify their magnitudes
as , , and . We identify their directions are the angles , ,
and . We resolve each displacement vector to its scalar components and substitute the
components into Equation 2.25 to obtain the scalar components of the resultant displacement from the lodge to
the rest point. On the way back from the rest point to the lodge, the displacement is . Finally, we find the
magnitude and direction of .
Solution
Scalar components of the displacement vectors are
Scalar components of the net displacement vector are
Hence, the skier’s net displacement vector is their displacement is . On the way back to the lodge,
. Its magnitude is
and its direction angle is .
south of east.
Therefore, to return to the lodge, they must go 6.2 km in a direction about Significance
Notice that no figure is needed to solve this problem by the analytical method. Figures are required when using a
graphical method; however, we can check if our solution makes sense by sketching it, which is a useful final step in
solving any vector problem.
EXAMPLE 2.13
Displacement of a Jogger
A jogger runs up a flight of 200 identical steps to the top of a hill and then runs along the top of the hill 50.0 m
before he stops at a drinking fountain (Figure 2.26). His displacement vector from point Aat the bottom of the steps
to point Bat the fountain is . What is the height and width of each step in the flight?
What is the actual distance the jogger covers? If he makes a loop and returns to point A , what is his net
displacement vector?
Access for free at openstax.org
2.3 • Algebra of Vectors 69
FIGURE 2.26 A jogger runs up a flight of steps.
Strategy
The displacement vector is the vector sum of the jogger’s displacement vector along the stairs (from
point Aat the bottom of the stairs to point Tat the top of the stairs) and his displacement vector on the top of
the hill (from point Tat the top of the stairs to the fountain at point B ). We must find the horizontal and the vertical
components of . If each step has width w and height h , the horizontal component of must have a length of
200w and the vertical component must have a length of 200h. The actual distance the jogger covers is the sum of
the distance he runs up the stairs and the distance of 50.0 m that he runs along the top of the hill.
Solution
In the coordinate system indicated in Figure 2.26, the jogger’s displacement vector on the top of the hill is
. His net displacement vector is
Therefore, his displacement vector along the stairs is
Its scalar components are and . Therefore, we must have
Hence, the step width is w = 40.0 m/200 = 0.2 m = 20 cm, and the step height is h= 30.0 m/200 = 0.15 m = 15 cm.
The distance that the jogger covers along the stairs is
Thus, the actual distance he runs is . When he makes a loop and comes
back from the fountain to his initial position at point A , the total distance he covers is twice this distance, or 200.0
m. However, his net displacement vector is zero, because when his final position is the same as his initial position,
the scalar components of his net displacement vector are zero (Equation 2.13).
In many physical situations, we often need to know the direction of a vector. For example, we may want to know the
direction of a magnetic field vector at some point or the direction of motion of an object. We have already said
direction is given by a unit vector, which is a dimensionless entity—that is, it has no physical units associated with it.
When the vector in question lies along one of the axes in a Cartesian system of coordinates, the answer is simple,
because then its unit vector of direction is either parallel or antiparallel to the direction of the unit vector of an axis.
For example, the direction of vector is unit vector . The general rule of finding the unit vector of
70 2 • Vectors
direction for any vector is to divide it by its magnitude V :
2.26
We see from this expression that the unit vector of direction is indeed dimensionless because the numerator and the
denominator in Equation 2.26 have the same physical unit. In this way, Equation 2.26 allows us to express the unit
vector of direction in terms of unit vectors of the axes. The following example illustrates this principle.
EXAMPLE 2.14
The Unit Vector of Direction
If the velocity vector of the military convoy in Example 2.8 is vector of its direction of motion?
, what is the unit
Strategy
The unit vector of the convoy’s direction of motion is the unit vector vector is obtained by dividing a vector by its magnitude, in accordance with Equation 2.26.
that is parallel to the velocity vector. The unit
Solution
The magnitude of the vector is
To obtain the unit vector , divide by its magnitude:
Significance
Note that when using the analytical method with a calculator, it is advisable to carry out your calculations to at least
three decimal places and then round off the final answer to the required number of significant figures, which is the
way we performed calculations in this example. If you round off your partial answer too early, you risk your final
answer having a huge numerical error, and it may be far off from the exact answer or from a value measured in an
experiment.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.10
Verify that vector obtained in Example 2.14 is indeed a unit vector by computing its magnitude. If the convoy in
Example 2.8 was moving across a desert flatland—that is, if the third component of its velocity was zero—what is the
unit vector of its direction of motion? Which geographic direction does it represent?
Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 • Products of Vectors 71
2.4 Products of Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between the scalar product and the vector product of two vectors.
• Determine the scalar product of two vectors.
• Determine the vector product of two vectors.
• Describe how the products of vectors are used in physics.
A vector can be multiplied by another vector but may not be divided by another vector. There are two kinds of
products of vectors used broadly in physics and engineering. One kind of multiplication is a scalar mul tiplication of
two vect ors. Taking a scalar product of two vectors results in a number (a scalar), as its name indicates. Scalar
products are used to define work and energy relations. For example, the work that a force (a vector) performs on an
object while causing its displacement (a vector) is defined as a scalar product of the force vector with the
displacement vector. A quite different kind of multiplication is a vect or mul tiplication of vect ors. Taking a vector
product of two vectors returns as a result a vector, as its name suggests. Vector products are used to define other
derived vector quantities. For example, in describing rotations, a vector quantity called t or que is defined as a vector
product of an applied force (a vector) and its distance from pivot to force (a vector). It is important to distinguish
between these two kinds of vector multiplications because the scalar product is a scalar quantity and a vector
product is a vector quantity.
The Scalar Product of Two Vectors (the Dot Product)
Scalar multiplication of two vectors yields a scalar product.
SCALAR PRODUCT (DOT PRODUCT)
The scalar product of two vectors and is a number defined by the equation
2.27
where is the angle between the vectors (shown in Figure 2.27). The scalar product is also called the dot
product because of the dot notation that indicates it.
In the definition of the dot product, the direction of angle the two vectors to the other because and is a positive number when , and the dot product of two antiparallel vectors is scalar product of two orthog onal vect ors vanishes: itself is the square of its magnitude:
does not matter, and can be measured from either of
. The dot product is a negative number when
. Moreover, the dot product of two parallel vectors is
. The
. The scalar product of a vector with
2.28
FIGURE 2.27 The scalar product of two vectors. (a) The angle between the two vectors. (b) The orthogonal projection of vector onto
72 2 • Vectors
the direction of vector . (c) The orthogonal projection of vector onto the direction of vector .
EXAMPLE 2.15
The Scalar Product
For the vectors shown in Figure 2.13, find the scalar product .
Strategy
From Figure 2.13, the magnitudes of vectors difference: Solution
A straightforward calculation gives us
and are A= 10.0 and F= 20.0. Angle , between them, is the
. Substituting these values into Equation 2.27 gives the scalar product.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.11
For the vectors given in Figure 2.13, find the scalar products and .
In the Cartesian coordinate system, scalar products of the unit vector of an axis with other unit vectors of axes
always vanish because these unit vectors are orthogonal:
2.29
In these equations, we use the fact that the magnitudes of all unit vectors are one: vectors of the axes, Equation 2.28 gives the following identities:
. For unit
2.30
The scalar product the direction of vector vector (Figure 2.27(c)):
can also be interpreted as either the product of Bwith the projection (Figure 2.27(b)) or the product of Awith the projection of vector of vector onto
onto the direction of
For example, in the rectangular coordinate system in a plane, the scalar x-component of a vector is its dot product
with the unit vector , and the scalar y-component of a vector is its dot product with the unit vector :
Scalar multiplication of vectors is commutative,
2.31
and obeys the distributive law:
Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 • Products of Vectors 73
2.32
We can use the commutative and distributive laws to derive various relations for vectors, such as expressing the dot
product of two vectors in terms of their scalar components.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.12
For vector in a rectangular coordinate system, use Equation 2.29 through Equation 2.32 to
show that and .
When the vectors in Equation 2.27 are given in their vector component forms,
we can compute their scalar product as follows:
Since scalar products of two different unit vectors of axes give zero, and scalar products of unit vectors with
themselves give one (see Equation 2.29 and Equation 2.30), there are only three nonzero terms in this expression.
Thus, the scalar product simplifies to
2.33
We can use Equation 2.33 for the scalar product in terms of scalar components of vectors to find the angle between
two vectors. When we divide Equation 2.27 by AB , we obtain the equation for , into which we substitute
Equation 2.33:
2.34
Angle between vectors and is obtained by taking the inverse cosine of the expression in Equation 2.34.
EXAMPLE 2.16
Angle between Two Forces
Three dogs are pulling on a stick in different directions, as shown in Figure 2.28. The first dog pulls with force
, the second dog pulls with force with force . What is the angle between forces and ?
, and the third dog pulls
74 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.28 Three dogs are playing with a stick.
Strategy
The components of force vector are , , and , whereas those of force
vector are , , and . Computing the scalar product of these vectors and
their magnitudes, and substituting into Equation 2.34 gives the angle of interest.
Solution
The magnitudes of forces and are
and
Substituting the scalar components into Equation 2.33 yields the scalar product
Finally, substituting everything into Equation 2.34 gives the angle
Significance
Notice that when vectors are given in terms of the unit vectors of axes, we can find the angle between them without
knowing the specifics about the geographic directions the unit vectors represent. Here, for example, the
+x-direction might be to the east and the +y-direction might be to the north. But, the angle between the forces in
the problem is the same if the +x-direction is to the west and the +y-direction is to the south.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.13
Find the angle between forces and in Example 2.16.
Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 • Products of Vectors 75
EXAMPLE 2.17
The Work of a Force
When force pulls on an object and when it causes its displacement , we say the force performs work. The
amount of work the force does is the scalar product . If the stick in Example 2.16 moves momentarily and gets
displaced by vector , how much work is done by the third dog in Example 2.16?
Strategy
We compute the scalar product of displacement vector from the third dog. Let’s use to denote the work done by force with force vector on displacement .
Solution
Calculating the work is a straightforward application of the dot product:
, which is the pull
Significance
The SI unit of work is called the joule , where 1 J = 1 . The unit , so the answer can be expressed as .
can be written as
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.14
How much work is done by the first dog and by the second dog in Example 2.16 on the displacement in Example
2.17?
The Vector Product of Two Vectors (the Cross Product)
Vector multiplication of two vectors yields a vector product.
VECTOR PRODUCT (CROSS PRODUCT)
The vector product of two vectors and is denoted by and is often referred to as a cross product.
The vector product is a vector that has its direction perpendicular to both vectors and . In other words,
vector is perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and , as shown in Figure 2.29. The
magnitude of the vector product is defined as
2.35
where angle , between the two vectors, is measured from vector (second vector in the product), as indicated in Figure 2.29, and is between (first vector in the product) to vector
and .
According to Equation 2.35, the vector product vanishes for pairs of vectors that are either parallel antiparallel because .
or
76 2 • Vectors
FIGURE 2.29 The vector product of two vectors is drawn in three-dimensional space. (a) The vector product is a vector
perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and . Small squares drawn in perspective mark right angles between and , and
between and so that if and lie on the floor, vector points vertically upward to the ceiling. (b) The vector product is a
vector antiparallel to vector .
On the line perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and there are two alternative directions—either up
or down, as shown in Figure 2.29—and the direction of the vector product may be either one of them. In the
standard right-handed orientation, where the angle between vectors is measured counterclockwise from the first
vector, vector points upward , as seen in Figure 2.29(a). If we reverse the order of multiplication, so that now
comes first in the product, then vector must point downward , as seen in Figure 2.29(b). This means that
vectors and are antiparal lelto each other and that vector multiplication is notcommutative but
anticommutative. The anticommutative property means the vector product reverses the sign when the order of
multiplication is reversed:
2.36
The corkscrew right-hand rule is a common mnemonic used to determine the direction of the vector product. As
shown in Figure 2.30, a corkscrew is placed in a direction perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and ,
and its handle is turned in the direction from the first to the second vector in the product. The direction of the cross
product is given by the progression of the corkscrew.
FIGURE 2.30 The corkscrew right-hand rule can be used to determine the direction of the cross product . Place a corkscrew in the
direction perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and , and turn it in the direction from the first to the second vector in the
product. The direction of the cross product is given by the progression of the corkscrew. (a) Upward movement means the cross-product
vector points up. (b) Downward movement means the cross-product vector points downward.
Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 • Products of Vectors 77
EXAMPLE 2.18
The Torque of a Force
The mechanical advantage that a familiar tool called a wrenchprovides (Figure 2.31) depends on magnitude Fof the
applied force, on its direction with respect to the wrench handle, and on how far from the nut this force is applied.
The distance Rfrom the nut to the point where force vector is attached is represented by the radial vector . The
physical vector quantity that makes the nut turn is called t or que (denoted by , and it is the vector product of the
distance between the pivot to force with the force: .
To loosen a rusty nut, a 20.00-N force is applied to the wrench handle at angle and at a distance of 0.25 m
from the nut, as shown in Figure 2.31(a). Find the magnitude and direction of the torque applied to the nut. What
would the magnitude and direction of the torque be if the force were applied at angle , as shown in Figure
2.31(b)? For what value of angle does the torque have the largest magnitude?
FIGURE 2.31 A wrench provides grip and mechanical advantage in applying torque to turn a nut. (a) Turn counterclockwise to loosen the
nut. (b) Turn clockwise to tighten the nut.
Strategy
We adopt the frame of reference shown in Figure 2.31, where vectors and lie in the xy-plane and the origin is at
the position of the nut. The radial direction along vector (pointing away from the origin) is the reference direction
for measuring the angle because is the first vector in the vector product . Vector must lie along
the z-axis because this is the axis that is perpendicular to the xy-plane, where both and lie. To compute the
magnitude , we use Equation 2.35. To find the direction of , we use the corkscrew right-hand rule (Figure 2.30).
Solution
For the situation in (a), the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the positive direction of the z-axis.
Physically, it means the torque vector points out of the page, perpendicular to the wrench handle. We identify F=
20.00 N and R= 0.25 m, and compute the magnitude using Equation 2.35:
For the situation in (b), the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the negative direction of the z-axis.
Physically, it means the vector points into the page, perpendicular to the wrench handle. The magnitude of this
torque is
78 2 • Vectors
The torque has the largest value when , which happens when . Physically, it means the wrench is
most effective—giving us the best mechanical advantage—when we apply the force perpendicular to the wrench
handle. For the situation in this example, this best-torque value is .
Significance
When solving mechanics problems, we often do not need to use the corkscrew rule at all, as we’ll see now in the
following equivalent solution. Notice that once we have identified that vector lies along the z-axis, we can
write this vector in terms of the unit vector of the z-axis:
In this equation, the number that multiplies is the scalar z-component of the vector . In the computation of
this component, care must be taken that the angle is measured count erclockwise from (first vector) to
(second vector). Following this principle for the angles, we obtain for the situation in
(a), and we obtain for the situation in (b). In the latter case, the angle is negative
because the graph in Figure 2.31 indicates the angle is measured clockwise; but, the same result is obtained when
this angle is measured counterclockwise because and . In this
way, we obtain the solution without reference to the corkscrew rule. For the situation in (a), the solution is
; for the situation in (b), the solution is .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.15
For the vectors given in Figure 2.13, find the vector products and .
Similar to the dot product (Equation 2.32), the cross product has the following distributive property:
2.37
The distributive property is applied frequently when vectors are expressed in their component forms, in terms of
unit vectors of Cartesian axes.
When we apply the definition of the cross product, Equation 2.35, to unit vectors x-, y-, and z-directions in space, we find that
, , and that define the positive
2.38
All other cross products of these three unit vectors must be vectors of unit magnitudes because , , and are
orthogonal. For example, for the pair and , the magnitude is . The direction of
the vector product must be orthogonal to the xy-plane, which means it must be along the z-axis. The only unit
vectors along the z-axis are or . By the corkscrew rule, the direction of vector must be parallel to the
positive z-axis. Therefore, the result of the multiplication is identical to . We can repeat similar reasoning
for the remaining pairs of unit vectors. The results of these multiplications are
2.39
Notice that in Equation 2.39, the three unit vectors , , and appear in the cyclic order shown in a diagram in
Figure 2.32(a). The cyclic order means that in the product formula, follows and comes before , or follows
and comes before , or follows and comes before . The cross product of two different unit vectors is always a
Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 • Products of Vectors 79
third unit vector. When two unit vectors in the cross product appear in the cyclic order, the result of such a
multiplication is the remaining unit vector, as illustrated in Figure 2.32(b). When unit vectors in the cross product
appear in a different order, the result is a unit vector that is antiparallel to the remaining unit vector (i.e., the result is
with the minus sign, as shown by the examples in Figure 2.32(c) and Figure 2.32(d). In practice, when the task is to
find cross products of vectors that are given in vector component form, this rule for the cross-multiplication of unit
vectors is very useful.
FIGURE 2.32 (a) The diagram of the cyclic order of the unit vectors of the axes. (b) The only cross products where the unit vectors appear in
the cyclic order. These products have the positive sign. (c, d) Two examples of cross products where the unit vectors do not appear in the
cyclic order. These products have the negative sign.
Suppose we want to find the cross product for vectors and .
We can use the distributive property (Equation 2.37), the anticommutative property (Equation 2.36), and the results
in Equation 2.38 and Equation 2.39 for unit vectors to perform the following algebra:
When performing algebraic operations involving the cross product, be very careful about keeping the correct order
of multiplication because the cross product is anticommutative. The last two steps that we still have to do to
complete our task are, first, grouping the terms that contain a common unit vector and, second, factoring. In this
way we obtain the following very useful expression for the computation of the cross product:
2.40
80 2 • Vectors
In this expression, the scalar components of the cross-product vector are
2.41
When finding the cross product, in practice, we can use either Equation 2.35 or Equation 2.40, depending on which
one of them seems to be less complex computationally. They both lead to the same final result. One way to make
sure if the final result is correct is to use them both.
EXAMPLE 2.19
A Particle in a Magnetic Field
When moving in a magnetic field, some particles may experience a magnetic force. Without going into details—a
detailed study of magnetic phenomena comes in later chapters—let’s acknowledge that the magnetic field is a
vector, the magnetic force is a vector, and the velocity of the particle is a vector. The magnetic force vector is
proportional to the vector product of the velocity vector with the magnetic field vector, which we express as
. In this equation, a constant takes care of the consistency in physical units, so we can omit physical
units on vectors and . In this example, let’s assume the constant is positive.
A particle moving in space with velocity vector experiences a magnetic force. Find the magnetic force magnetic field vector is (a) force and angle the force vector enters a region with a magnetic field and
on this particle at the entry point to the region where the
and (b) . In each case, find magnitude Fof the magnetic
makes with the given magnetic field vector .
Strategy
First, we want to find the vector product , because then we can determine the magnetic force using
. Magnitude Fcan be found either by using components, , or by computing the
magnitude directly using Equation 2.35. In the latter approach, we would have to find the angle between
vectors and . When we have , the general method for finding the direction angle involves the computation of
the scalar product and substitution into Equation 2.34. To compute the vector product we can either use
Equation 2.40 or compute the product directly, whichever way is simpler.
Solution
The components of the velocity vector are , , and .
(a) The components of the magnetic field vector are Equation 2.41 gives the scalar components of vector :
, , and . Substituting them into
Thus, the magnetic force is and its magnitude is
To compute angle , we may need to find the magnitude of the magnetic field vector,
and the scalar product :
Access for free at openstax.org
2.4 • Products of Vectors 81
Now, substituting into Equation 2.34 gives angle :
Hence, the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field vector. (We could have saved some time if
we had computed the scalar product earlier.)
(b) Because vector product directly:
has only one component, we can perform the algebra quickly and find the vector
The magnitude of the magnetic force is
Because the scalar product is
the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field vector .
Significance
Even without actually computing the scalar product, we can predict that the magnetic force vector must always be
perpendicular to the magnetic field vector because of the way this vector is constructed. Namely, the magnetic force
vector is the vector product and, by the definition of the vector product (see Figure 2.29), vector
must be perpendicular to both vectors and .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 2.16
and , find (a) , (b) Given two vectors the angle between and vector .
, (c) the angle between and , and (d)
In conclusion to this section, we want to stress that “dot product” and “cross product” are entirely different
mathematical objects that have different meanings. The dot product is a scalar; the cross product is a vector. Later
chapters use the terms dot productand scalar productinterchangeably. Similarly, the terms cross productand
vect or productare used interchangeably.
82 2 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
anticommutative property change in the order of
operation introduces the minus sign
antiparallel vectors two vectors with directions that
differ by
associative commutative terms can be grouped in any fashion
operations can be performed in any
order
component form of a vector a vector written as the
vector sum of its components in terms of unit
vectors
corkscrew right-hand rule a rule used to determine
the direction of the vector product
cross product the result of the vector multiplication
of vectors is a vector called a cross product; also
called a vector product
difference of two vectors vector sum of the first
vector with the vector antiparallel to the second
direction angle in a plane, an angle between the
positive direction of the x-axis and the vector,
measured counterclockwise from the axis to the
vector
displacement change in position
distributive multiplication can be distributed over
terms in summation
dot product the result of the scalar multiplication of
two vectors is a scalar called a dot product; also
called a scalar product
equal vectors two vectors are equal if and only if all
their corresponding components are equal;
alternately, two parallel vectors of equal
magnitudes
magnitude length of a vector
null vector a vector with all its components equal to
zero
orthogonal vectors differ by exactly two vectors with directions that
, synonymous with
perpendicular vectors
parallel vectors two vectors with exactly the same
direction angles
parallelogram rule geometric construction of the
vector sum in a plane
polar coordinate system an orthogonal coordinate
Key Equations
Multiplication by a scalar (vector
equation)
Multiplication by a scalar (scalar
equation for magnitudes)
Resultant of two vectors
Access for free at openstax.org
system where location in a plane is given by polar
coordinates
polar coordinates radial coordinate a radial coordinate and an angle
distance to the origin in a polar
coordinate system
resultant vector vector sum of two (or more) vectors
scalar a number, synonymous with a scalar quantity
in physics
scalar component a number that multiplies a unit
vector in a vector component of a vector
scalar equation equation in which the left-hand and
right-hand sides are numbers
scalar product the result of the scalar multiplication
of two vectors is a scalar called a scalar product;
also called a dot product
scalar quantity quantity that can be specified
completely by a single number with an appropriate
physical unit
tail-to-head geometric construction geometric
construction for drawing the resultant vector of
many vectors
unit vector vector of a unit magnitude that specifies
direction; has no physical unit
unit vectors of the axes unit vectors that define
orthogonal directions in a plane or in space
vector mathematical object with magnitude and
direction
vector components orthogonal components of a
vector; a vector is the vector sum of its vector
components.
vector equation equation in which the left-hand and
right-hand sides are vectors
vector product the result of the vector multiplication
of vectors is a vector called a vector product; also
called a cross product
vector quantity physical quantity described by a
mathematical vector—that is, by specifying both its
magnitude and its direction; synonymous with a
vector in physics
vector sum resultant of the combination of two (or
more) vectors
2 • Chapter Review 83
Commutative law
Associative law
Distributive law
The component form of a vector in
two dimensions
Scalar components of a vector in
two dimensions
Magnitude of a vector in a plane
The direction angle of a vector in a
plane
Scalar components of a vector in a
plane
Polar coordinates in a plane
The component form of a vector in
three dimensions
The scalar z-component of a vector
in three dimensions
Magnitude of a vector in three
dimensions
Distributive property
Antiparallel vector to
Equal vectors
Components of the resultant of N
vectors
General unit vector
Definition of the scalar product
Commutative property of the scalar
product
Distributive property of the scalar
product
Scalar product in terms of scalar
components of vectors
Cosine of the angle between two
vectors
Dot products of unit vectors
Magnitude of the vector product
(definition)
84 2 • Chapter Review
Anticommutative property of the
vector product
Distributive property of the vector
product
Cross products of unit vectors
The cross product in terms of scalar
components of vectors
Summary
2.1 Scalars and Vectors
• A vector quantity is any quantity that has
magnitude and direction, such as displacement
or velocity. Vector quantities are represented by
mathematical objects called vectors.
• Geometrically, vectors are represented by
arrows, with the end marked by an arrowhead.
The length of the vector is its magnitude, which is
a positive scalar. On a plane, the direction of a
vector is given by the angle the vector makes
with a reference direction, often an angle with
the horizontal. The direction angle of a vector is a
scalar.
• Two vectors are equal if and only if they have the
same magnitudes and directions. Parallel vectors
have the same direction angles but may have
different magnitudes. Antiparallel vectors have
direction angles that differ by . Orthogonal
vectors have direction angles that differ by .
• When a vector is multiplied by a scalar, the result
is another vector of a different length than the
length of the original vector. Multiplication by a
positive scalar does not change the original
direction; only the magnitude is affected.
Multiplication by a negative scalar reverses the
original direction. The resulting vector is
antiparallel to the original vector. Multiplication
by a scalar is distributive. Vectors can be divided
by nonzero scalars but cannot be divided by
vectors.
• Two or more vectors can be added to form
another vector. The vector sum is called the
resultant vector. We can add vectors to vectors or
scalars to scalars, but we cannot add scalars to
vectors. Vector addition is commutative and
associative.
• To construct a resultant vector of two vectors in a
plane geometrically, we use the parallelogram
rule. To construct a resultant vector of many
vectors in a plane geometrically, we use the tail-
Access for free at openstax.org
to-head method.
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
• Vectors are described in terms of their
components in a coordinate system. In two
dimensions (in a plane), vectors have two
components. In three dimensions (in space),
vectors have three components.
• A vector component of a vector is its part in an
axis direction. The vector component is the
product of the unit vector of an axis with its
scalar component along this axis. A vector is the
resultant of its vector components.
• Scalar components of a vector are differences of
coordinates, where coordinates of the origin are
subtracted from end point coordinates of a
vector. In a rectangular system, the magnitude of
a vector is the square root of the sum of the
squares of its components.
• In a plane, the direction of a vector is given by an
angle the vector has with the positive x-axis. This
direction angle is measured counterclockwise.
The scalar x-component of a vector can be
expressed as the product of its magnitude with
the cosine of its direction angle, and the scalar
y-component can be expressed as the product of
its magnitude with the sine of its direction angle.
• In a plane, there are two equivalent coordinate
systems. The Cartesian coordinate system is
defined by unit vectors and along the x-axis
and the y-axis, respectively. The polar coordinate
system is defined by the radial unit vector ,
which gives the direction from the origin, and a
unit vector , which is perpendicular (orthogonal)
to the radial direction.
2.3 Algebra of Vectors
• Analytical methods of vector algebra allow us to
find resultants of sums or differences of vectors
without having to draw them. Analytical methods
of vector addition are exact, contrary to graphical
methods, which are approximate.
• Analytical methods of vector algebra are used
routinely in mechanics, electricity, and
magnetism. They are important mathematical
tools of physics.
2.4 Products of Vectors
1. 2. • There are two kinds of multiplication for vectors.
One kind of multiplication is the scalar product,
also known as the dot product. The other kind of
multiplication is the vector product, also known
as the cross product. The scalar product of
vectors is a number (scalar). The vector product
of vectors is a vector.
• Both kinds of multiplication have the distributive
property, but only the scalar product has the
commutative property. The vector product has
the anticommutative property, which means that
when we change the order in which two vectors
are multiplied, the result acquires a minus sign.
• The scalar product of two vectors is obtained by
Conceptual Questions
2.1 Scalars and Vectors
A weather forecast states the temperature is
predicted to be the following day. Is this
temperature a vector or a scalar quantity?
Explain.
Which of the following is a vector: a person’s
height, the altitude on Mt. Everest, the velocity
of a fly, the age of Earth, the boiling point of
water, the cost of a book, Earth’s population, or
the acceleration of gravity?
Give a specific example of a vector, stating its
magnitude, units, and direction.
What do vectors and scalars have in common?
How do they differ?
5. Suppose you add two vectors and . What
relative direction between them produces the
resultant with the greatest magnitude? What is
the maximum magnitude? What relative
direction between them produces the resultant
with the smallest magnitude? What is the
minimum magnitude?
Is it possible to add a scalar quantity to a vector
quantity?
Is it possible for two vectors of different
magnitudes to add to zero? Is it possible for
three vectors of different magnitudes to add to
3. 4. 6. 7. 2 • Chapter Review 85
multiplying their magnitudes with the cosine of
the angle between them. The scalar product of
orthogonal vectors vanishes; the scalar product
of antiparallel vectors is negative.
• The vector product of two vectors is a vector
perpendicular to both of them. Its magnitude is
obtained by multiplying their magnitudes by the
sine of the angle between them. The direction of
the vector product can be determined by the
corkscrew right-hand rule. The vector product of
two either parallel or antiparallel vectors
vanishes. The magnitude of the vector product is
largest for orthogonal vectors.
• The scalar product of vectors is used to find
angles between vectors and in the definitions of
derived scalar physical quantities such as work
or energy.
• The cross product of vectors is used in definitions
of derived vector physical quantities such as
torque or magnetic force, and in describing
rotations.
8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. zero? Explain.
Does the odometer in an automobile indicate a
scalar or a vector quantity?
When a 10,000-m runner competing on a 400-m
track crosses the finish line, what is the runner’s
net displacement? Can this displacement be
zero? Explain.
A vector has zero magnitude. Is it necessary to
specify its direction? Explain.
Can a magnitude of a vector be negative?
Can the magnitude of a particle’s displacement
be greater that the distance traveled?
If two vectors are equal, what can you say about
their components? What can you say about their
magnitudes? What can you say about their
directions?
If three vectors sum up to zero, what geometric
condition do they satisfy?
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
Give an example of a nonzero vector that has a
component of zero.
Explain why a vector cannot have a component
greater than its own magnitude.
If two vectors are equal, what can you say about
their components?
14. 15. 16. 17. 
86 2 • Chapter Review
18. If vectors and are orthogonal, what is the
component of along the direction of ? What
is the component of along the direction of ?
19. 20. If one of the two components of a vector is not
zero, can the magnitude of the other vector
component of this vector be zero?
If two vectors have the same magnitude, do
their components have to be the same?
2.4 Products of Vectors
21. What is wrong with the following expressions?
How can you correct them? (a) , (b)
Problems
2.1 Scalars and Vectors
25. 26. 27. 28. A scuba diver makes a slow descent into the
depths of the ocean. His vertical position with
respect to a boat on the surface changes several
times. He makes the first stop 9.0 m from the
boat but has a problem with equalizing the
pressure, so he ascends 3.0 m and then
continues descending for another 12.0 m to the
second stop. From there, he ascends 4 m and
then descends for 18.0 m, ascends again for 7 m
and descends again for 24.0 m, where he makes
a stop, waiting for his buddy. Assuming the
positive direction up to the surface, express his
net vertical displacement vector in terms of the
unit vector. What is his distance to the boat?
In a tug-of-war game on one campus, 15
students pull on a rope at both ends in an effort
to displace the central knot to one side or the
other. Two students pull with force 196 N each
to the right, four students pull with force 98 N
each to the left, five students pull with force 62
N each to the left, three students pull with force
150 N each to the right, and one student pulls
with force 250 N to the left. Assuming the
positive direction to the right, express the net
pull on the knot in terms of the unit vector. How
big is the net pull on the knot? In what direction?
Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight west and then
25.0 m straight north. How far are you from your
starting point and what is the compass direction
of a line connecting your starting point to your
final position? Use a graphical method.
For the vectors given in the following figure, use a
graphical method to find the following resultants: (a)
, (b) , (c) , (d) , (e) ,
Access for free at openstax.org
22. 23. 24. , (c) , (d) , (e)
, (f) , (g)
, (h) , (i) ,
and (j) .
If the cross product of two vectors vanishes,
what can you say about their directions?
If the dot product of two vectors vanishes, what
can you say about their directions?
What is the dot product of a vector with the
cross product that this vector has with another
vector?
(f) , (g) ; and (h) .
29. 30. 31. A delivery driver starts at the post office, drives
40 km north, then 20 km west, then 60 km
northeast, and finally 50 km north to stop for
lunch. Use a graphical method to find their net
displacement vector.
An adventurous dog strays from home, runs
three blocks east, two blocks north, one block
east, one block north, and two blocks west.
Assuming that each block is about 100 m, how
far from home and in what direction is the dog?
Use a graphical method.
In an attempt to escape a desert island, a
32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 2 • Chapter Review 87
castaway builds a raft and sets out to sea. The
wind shifts a great deal during the day and he is
blown along the following directions: 2.50 km
and north of west, then 4.70 km and
south of east, then 1.30 km and south of
west, then 5.10 km straight east, then 1.70 km
and east of north, then 7.20 km and
south of west, and finally 2.80 km and
north of east. Use a graphical method to find the
castaway’s final position relative to the island.
A small plane flies 40.0 km in a direction
north of east and then flies 30.0 km in a
direction north of east. Use a graphical
method to find the total distance the plane
covers from the starting point and the direction
of the path to the final position.
A trapper walks a 5.0-km straight-line distance from
his cabin to the lake, as shown in the following
figure. Use a graphical method (the parallelogram
rule) to determine the trapper’s displacement
directly to the east and displacement directly to the
north that sum up to his resultant displacement
vector. If the trapper walked only in directions east
and north, zigzagging his way to the lake, how many
kilometers would he have to walk to get to the lake?
resultant
2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal and points to the
right, resolve the vectors given in the following
figure to their scalar components and express them
in vector component form.
37. 38. 39. A surveyor measures the distance across a river
that flows straight north by the following
method. Starting directly across from a tree on
the opposite bank, the surveyor walks 100 m
along the river to establish a baseline. She then
sights across to the tree and reads that the angle
from the baseline to the tree is . How wide is
the river?
A pedestrian walks 6.0 km east and then 13.0
km north. Use a graphical method to find the
pedestrian’s resultant displacement and
geographic direction.
The magnitudes of two displacement vectors are
A= 20 m and B= 6 m. What are the largest and
the smallest values of the magnitude of the
40. 41. Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight west and then
25.0 m straight north. How far are you from your
starting point? What is your displacement
vector? What is the direction of your
displacement? Assume the +x-axis is to the
east.
You drive 7.50 km in a straight line in a direction
east of north. (a) Find the distances you
would have to drive straight east and then
straight north to arrive at the same point. (b)
Show that you still arrive at the same point if the
east and north legs are reversed in order.
Assume the +x-axis is to the east.
A sledge is being pulled by two horses on a flat
terrain. The net force on the sledge can be
expressed in the Cartesian coordinate system as
vector , where
and denote directions to the east and north,
respectively. Find the magnitude and direction of
the pull.
A trapper walks a 5.0-km straight-line distance from
her cabin to the lake, as shown in the following
figure. Determine the east and north components of
her displacement vector. How many more
88 2 • Chapter Review
kilometers would she have to walk if she walked
along the component displacements? What is her
displacement vector?
43. 44. 45. 42. The polar coordinates of a point are and
5.50 m. What are its Cartesian coordinates?
Two points in a plane have polar coordinates
and .
Determine their Cartesian coordinates and the
distance between them in the Cartesian
coordinate system. Round the distance to a
nearest centimeter.
A chameleon is resting quietly on a lanai screen,
waiting for an insect to come by. Assume the
origin of a Cartesian coordinate system at the
lower left-hand corner of the screen and the
horizontal direction to the right as the
+x-direction. If its coordinates are (2.000 m,
1.000 m), (a) how far is it from the corner of the
screen? (b) What is its location in polar
coordinates?
Two points in the Cartesian plane are A (2.00 m,
−4.00 m) and B (−3.00 m, 3.00 m). Find the
distance between them and their polar
coordinates.
A fly enters through an open window and zooms
around the room. In a Cartesian coordinate
system with three axes along three edges of the
room, the fly changes its position from point
b (4.0 m, 1.5 m, 2.5 m) to point e(1.0 m, 4.5 m,
0.5 m). Find the scalar components of the fly’s
displacement vector and express its
displacement vector in vector component form.
What is its magnitude?
2.3 Algebra of Vectors
47. For vectors and ,
calculate (a) and its magnitude and
direction angle, and (b) and its magnitude
and direction angle.
46. Access for free at openstax.org
48. A particle undergoes three consecutive
displacements given by vectors
,
, and
. (a) Find the
resultant displacement vector of the particle. (b)
What is the magnitude of the resultant
displacement? (c) If all displacements were
along one line, how far would the particle travel?
49. Given two displacement vectors
and
, find the
displacements and their magnitudes for (a)
and (b) .
50. A small plane flies in a direction
north of east and then flies in a
direction north of east. Use the analytical
method to find the total distance the plane
covers from the starting point, and the
geographic direction of its displacement vector.
What is its displacement vector?
51. In an attempt to escape a desert island, a
castaway builds a raft and sets out to sea. The
wind shifts a great deal during the day, and she
is blown along the following straight lines: 2.50
km and north of west, then 4.70 km and
south of east, then 1.30 km and
south of west, then 5.10 km due east, then 1.70
km and east of north, then 7.20 km and
south of west, and finally 2.80 km and
north of east. Use the analytical method to
find the resultant vector of all her displacement
vectors. What is its magnitude and direction?
52. Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for
the vectors given in the following figure, use the
analytical method to find the following resultants:
(a) , (b) , (c) , (d)
, (e) , (f) , (g)
, and (h) .
2 • Chapter Review 89
.
Find the unit vector of direction for the following
vector quantities: (a) Force ,
(b) displacement , and (c)
velocity .
At one point in space, the direction of the
electric field vector is given in the Cartesian
system by the unit vector
. If the magnitude of the
electric field vector is E= 400.0 V/m, what are
the scalar components , , and of the
electric field vector at this point? What is the
direction angle of the electric field vector at
this point?
A barge is pulled by the two tugboats shown in the
following figure. One tugboat pulls on the barge with
a force of magnitude 4000 units of force at
above the line AB (see the figure) and the other
tugboat pulls on the barge with a force of magnitude
5000 units of force at below the line AB. Resolve
the pulling forces to their scalar components and
find the components of the resultant force pulling on
the barge. What is the magnitude of the resultant
pull? What is its direction relative to the line AB?
53. 54. 55. FIGURE 2.33
Given the vectors in the preceding figure, find
vector that solves equations (a)
and (b) . Assume the +x-axis
is horizontal to the right.
A delivery driver starts at the post office, drives
40 km north, then 20 km west, then 60 km
northeast, and finally 50 km north to stop for
lunch. Use the analytical method to determine
the following: (a) Find his net displacement
vector. (b) How far is the restaurant from the
post office? (c) If he returns directly from the
restaurant to the post office, what is his
displacement vector on the return trip? (d) What
is his compass heading on the return trip?
Assume the +x-axis is to the east.
An adventurous dog strays from home, runs
three blocks east, two blocks north, and one
block east, one block north, and two blocks
west. Assuming that each block is about a 100
yd, use the analytical method to find the dog’s
net displacement vector, its magnitude, and its
direction. Assume the +x-axis is to the east. How
would your answer be affected if each block was
about 100 m?
56. If ,
, and
, find the unknown
constants a and bsuch that .
57. Given the displacement vector
find the displacement vector so that
58. 59. 60. 
90 2 • Chapter Review
63. 64. FIGURE 2.34
61. In the control tower at a regional airport, an air
traffic controller monitors two aircraft that travel
in straight paths directly away from the control
tower. One plane is a cargo carrier Boeing 747
climbing at above the horizontal, and
moving north of west. At some moment in
time, the controller notes that the Boeing is at an
altitude of 2500 m and the DC-3 is at an altitude
of 3000 m. The other plane is a Douglas DC-3
climbing at above the horizontal, and cruising
directly west. (a) Find the position vectors of the
planes relative to the control tower at this time.
(b) What is the distance between the planes at
this time?
2.4 Products of Vectors
65. 66. 67. 62. Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right
for the vectors in the preceding figure, find (a)
the component of vector along vector , (b)
the component of vector along vector , (c)
the component of vector along vector , and
(d) the component of vector along vector .
Find the angle between vectors for (a)
and
and (b)
and
.
makes with the x-, y-,
is orthogonal to the
force vector .
Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right
for the vectors in the previous figure, find the
following vector products: (a) , (b)
, (c) , (d) , (e)
, (f) , (g) , and (h)
.
Find the angles that vector
and z- axes.
Show that the force vector
Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for
the vectors in the following figure, find the following
scalar products: (a) , (b) , (c) , (d)
, (e) , (f) , (g) , and
68. Find the cross product for (a)
and
(h) .
, (b)
and
Access for free at openstax.org
, (c) and
, and (d)
and .
69. For the vectors in the earlier figure, find (a)
, (b) , and (c)
Additional Problems
71. You fly in a straight line in still air in the
direction south of west. (a) Find the
distances you would have to fly due south and
then due west to arrive at the same point. (b)
Find the distances you would have to fly first in a
direction south of west and then in a
direction west of north. Note these are the
components of the displacement along a
different set of axes—namely, the one rotated by
with respect to the axes in (a).
72. Rectangular coordinates of a point are given by
(2, y) and its polar coordinates are given by
. Find y and r.
73. If the polar coordinates of a point are and
its rectangular coordinates are , determine
the polar coordinates of the following points: (a)
(−x, y), (b) (−2x, −2y), and (c) (3x, −3y).
74. Vectors and have identical magnitudes of
5.0 units. Find the angle between them if
.
75. Starting at the island of Moi in an unknown
archipelago, a fishing boat makes a round trip
with two stops at the islands of Noi and Poi. It
sails from Moi for 4.76 nautical miles (nmi) in a
direction north of east to Noi. From Noi, it
sails west of north to Poi. On its return leg
from Poi, it sails east of south. What
distance does the boat sail between Noi and
Poi? What distance does it sail between Moi and
Poi? Express your answer both in nautical miles
and in kilometers. Note: 1 nmi = 1852 m.
76. An air traffic controller notices two signals from
two planes on the radar monitor. One plane is at
altitude 800 m and in a 19.2-km horizontal
distance to the tower in a direction south of
west. The second plane is at altitude 1100 m
and its horizontal distance is 17.6 km and
south of west. What is the distance between
these planes?
77. Show that when , then
, where is the
2 • Chapter Review 91
.
70. (a) If ? (b) If ? (c) If ? Why or why not?
, can we conclude
, can we conclude
, can we conclude
78. 79. 80. 81. 82. angle between vectors and .
Four force vectors each have the same
magnitude f . What is the largest magnitude the
resultant force vector may have when these
forces are added? What is the smallest
magnitude of the resultant? Make a graph of
both situations.
A skater glides along a circular path of radius
5.00 m in clockwise direction. When he coasts
around one-half of the circle, starting from the
west point, find (a) the magnitude of his
displacement vector and (b) how far he actually
skated. (c) What is the magnitude of his
displacement vector when he skates all the way
around the circle and comes back to the west
point?
A stubborn dog is being walked on a leash by its
owner. At one point, the dog encounters an
interesting scent at some spot on the ground
and wants to explore it in detail, but the owner
gets impatient and pulls on the leash with force
along the
leash. (a) What is the magnitude of the pulling
force? (b) What angle does the leash make with
the vertical?
If the velocity vector of a polar bear is
, how fast and in
what geographic direction is it heading? Here,
and are directions to geographic east and
north, respectively.
Find the scalar components of three-
dimensional vectors and in the following
figure and write the vectors in vector component
form in terms of the unit vectors of the axes.
92 2 • Chapter Review
85. Vectors and are two orthogonal vectors in
the xy-plane and they have identical
magnitudes. If , find .
86. For the three-dimensional vectors in the
following figure, find (a) , (b) ,
and (c) .
83. A diver explores a shallow reef off the coast of
Belize. She initially swims 90.0 m north, makes a
turn to the east and continues for 200.0 m, then
follows a big grouper for 80.0 m in the direction
north of east. In the meantime, a local
current displaces her by 150.0 m south.
Assuming the current is no longer present, in
what direction and how far should she now swim
to come back to the point where she started?
84. A force vector has x- and y-components,
respectively, of −8.80 units of force and 15.00
units of force. The x- and y-components of force
vector are, respectively, 13.20 units of force
and −6.60 units of force. Find the components of
force vector that satisfies the vector equation
.
87. Show that is the volume of the
parallelepiped, with edges formed by the three
vectors in the following figure.
Access for free at openstax.org
Challenge Problems
88. Vector is 5.0 cm long and vector is 4.0 cm
long. Find the angle between these two vectors
when .
89. What is the component of the force vector
along the force
90. vector ?
The following figure shows a triangle formed by
the three vectors , , and . If vector is
drawn between the midpoints of vectors and
, show that .
91. Distances between points in a plane do not change
when a coordinate system is rotated. In other
words, the magnitude of a vector is invariantunder
rotations of the coordinate system. Suppose a
coordinate system S is rotated about its origin by
angle to become a new coordinate system , as
shown in the following figure. A point in a plane has
coordinates (x, y) in S and coordinates in
.
2 • Chapter Review 93
(a) Show that, during the transformation of
rotation, the coordinates in are expressed in
terms of the coordinates in S by the following
relations:
(b) Show that the distance of point Pto the origin is
invariant under rotations of the coordinate system.
Here, you have to show that
(c) Show that the distance between points Pand Q
is invariant under rotations of the coordinate
system. Here, you have to show that
94 2 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 3
Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.1 A JR Central L0 series five-car maglev (magnetic levitation) train undergoing a test run on the Yamanashi Test Track. The
maglev train’s motion can be described using kinematics, the subject of this chapter. (credit: modification of work by “Maryland
GovPics”/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
3.5 Free Fall
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration
INTRODUCTION
Our universe is full of objects in motion. From the stars, planets, and galaxies; to the motion of
people and animals; down to the microscopic scale of atoms and molecules—everything in our universe is in motion.
We can describe motion using the two disciplines of kinematics and dynamics. We study dynamics, which is
concerned with the causes of motion, in Newton’s Laws of Motion; but, there is much to be learned about motion
without referring to what causes it, and this is the study of kinematics. Kinematics involves describing motion
through properties such as position, time, velocity, and acceleration.
A full treatment of kinematics considers motion in two and three dimensions. For now, we discuss motion in one
dimension, which provides us with the tools necessary to study multidimensional motion. A good example of an
object undergoing one-dimensional motion is the maglev (magnetic levitation) train depicted at the beginning of this
chapter. As it travels, say, from Tokyo to Kyoto, it is at different positions along the track at various times in its
journey, and therefore has displacements, or changes in position. It also has a variety of velocities along its path and
it undergoes accelerations (changes in velocity). With the skills learned in this chapter we can calculate these
quantities and average velocity. All these quantities can be described using kinematics, without knowing the train’s
mass or the forces involved.
96 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define position, displacement, and distance traveled.
• Calculate the total displacement given the position as a function of time.
• Determine the total distance traveled.
• Calculate the average velocity given the displacement and elapsed time.
When you’re in motion, the basic questions to ask are: Where are you? Where are you going? How fast are you
getting there? The answers to these questions require that you specify your position, your displacement, and your
average velocity—the terms we define in this section.
Position
To describe the motion of an object, you must first be able to describe its position (x): where it is at an y particular
time. More precisely, we need to specify its position relative to a convenient frame of reference. A frame of reference
is an arbitrary set of axes from which the position and motion of an object are described. Earth is often used as a
frame of reference, and we often describe the position of an object as it relates to stationary objects on Earth. For
example, a rocket launch could be described in terms of the position of the rocket with respect to Earth as a whole,
whereas a cyclist’s position could be described in terms of where she is in relation to the buildings she passes
Figure 3.2. In other cases, we use reference frames that are not stationary but are in motion relative to Earth. To
describe the position of a person in an airplane, for example, we use the airplane, not Earth, as the reference frame.
To describe the position of an object undergoing one-dimensional motion, we often use the variable x. Later in the
chapter, during the discussion of free fall, we use the variable y.
FIGURE 3.2 These cyclists in Vietnam can be described by their position relative to buildings or a canal. Their motion can be described by
their change in position, or displacement, in a frame of reference. (credit: modification of work by Suzan Black)
Displacement
If an object moves relative to a frame of reference—for example, if a professor moves to the right relative to a
whiteboard Figure 3.3—then the object’s position changes. This change in position is called displacement. The word
displacementimplies that an object has moved, or has been displaced. Although position is the numerical value of x
along a straight line where an object might be located, displacement gives the chang e in position along this line.
Since displacement indicates direction, it is a vector and can be either positive or negative, depending on the choice
of positive direction. Also, an analysis of motion can have many displacements embedded in it. If right is positive
and an object moves 2 m to the right, then 4 m to the left, the individual displacements are 2 m and m,
respectively.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.1 • Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity 97
FIGURE 3.3 A professor paces left and right while lecturing. Her position relative to Earth is given by x. The +2.0-m displacement of the
professor relative to Earth is represented by an arrow pointing to the right.
DISPLACEMENT
Displacement is the change in position of an object:
3.1
where is displacement, is the final position, and is the initial position.
We use the uppercase Greek letter delta (Δ) to mean “change in” whatever quantity follows it; thus, means
chang e in position (final position less initial position). We always solve for displacement by subtracting initial
position from final position . Note that the SI unit for displacement is the meter, but sometimes we use
kilometers or other units of length. Keep in mind that when units other than meters are used in a problem, you may
need to convert them to meters to complete the calculation (see Appendix B).
Objects in motion can also have a series of displacements. In the previous example of the pacing professor, the
individual displacements are 2 m and m, giving a total displacement of −2 m. We define total displacement
, as the sum of the individual displacements, and express this mathematically with the equation
3.2
where are the individual displacements. In the earlier example,
Similarly,
Thus,
The total displacement is 2 − 4 = −2 m along the x-axis. It is also useful to calculate the magnitude of the
displacement, or its size. The magnitude of the displacement is always positive. This is the absolute value of the
98 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
displacement, because displacement is a vector and cannot have a negative value of magnitude. In our example, the
magnitude of the total displacement is 2 m, whereas the magnitudes of the individual displacements are 2 m and 4
m.
The magnitude of the total displacement should not be confused with the distance traveled. Distance traveled
, is the total length of the path traveled between two positions. In the previous problem, the distance
traveled is the sum of the magnitudes of the individual displacements:
Average Velocity
To calculate the other physical quantities in kinematics we must introduce the time variable. The time variable
allows us not only to state where the object is (its position) during its motion, but also how fast it is moving. How fast
an object is moving is given by the rate at which the position changes with time.
For each position , we assign a particular time . If the details of the motion at each instant are not important, the
rate is usually expressed as the average velocity . This vector quantity is simply the total displacement between
two points divided by the time taken to travel between them. The time taken to travel between two points is called
the elapsed time.
AVERAGE VELOCITY
If and are the positions of an object at times and , respectively, then
3.3
It is important to note that the average velocity is a vector and can be negative, depending on positions and .
EXAMPLE 3.1
Delivering Flyers
Jill sets out from her home to deliver flyers for her yard sale, traveling due east along her street lined with houses. At
km and 9 minutes later she runs out of flyers and has to retrace her steps back to her house to get more. This
takes an additional 9 minutes. After picking up more flyers, she sets out again on the same path, continuing where
she left off, and ends up 1.0 km from her house. This third leg of her trip takes minutes. At this point she turns
back toward her house, heading west. After km and minutes she stops to rest.
a. b. c. d. e. What is Jill’s total displacement to the point where she stops to rest?
What is the magnitude of the final displacement?
What is the average velocity during her entire trip?
What is the total distance traveled?
Make a graph of position versus time.
A sketch of Jill’s movements is shown in Figure 3.4.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.1 • Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity 99
FIGURE 3.4 Timeline of Jill’s movements.
Strategy
The problem contains data on the various legs of Jill’s trip, so it would be useful to make a table of the physical
quantities. We are given position and time in the wording of the problem so we can calculate the displacements and
the elapsed time. We take east to be the positive direction. From this information we can find the total displacement
and average velocity. Jill’s home is the starting point . The following table gives Jill’s time and position in the first
two columns, and the displacements are calculated in the third column.
Time ti (min) Position (km) Displacement (km)
Solution
a. From the above table, the total displacement is
b. The magnitude of the total displacement is .
c.
d. The total distance traveled (sum of magnitudes of individual displacements) is
.
e. We can graph Jill’s position versus time as a useful aid to see the motion; the graph is shown in Figure 3.5.
100 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.5 This graph depicts Jill’s position versus time. The average velocity is the slope of a line connecting the initial and final
points.
Significance
Jill’s total displacement is −0.75 km, which means at the end of her trip she ends up due west of her home.
The average velocity means if someone was to walk due west at km/min starting at the same time Jill left her
home, they both would arrive at the final stopping point at the same time. Note that if Jill were to end her trip at her
house, her total displacement would be zero, as well as her average velocity. The total distance traveled during the
58 minutes of elapsed time for her trip is 3.75 km.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.1
A cyclist rides 3 km west and then turns around and rides 2 km east. (a) What is their displacement? (b) What is the
distance traveled? (c) What is the magnitude of their displacement?
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between average velocity and instantaneous velocity.
• Describe the difference between velocity and speed.
• Calculate the instantaneous velocity given the mathematical equation for the position.
• Calculate the speed given the instantaneous velocity.
We have now seen how to calculate the average velocity between two positions. However, since objects in the real
world move continuously through space and time, we would like to find the velocity of an object at any single point.
We can find the velocity of the object anywhere along its path by using some fundamental principles of calculus.
This section gives us better insight into the physics of motion and will be useful in later chapters.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.2 • Instantaneous Velocity and Speed 101
Instantaneous Velocity
The quantity that tells us how fast an object is moving anywhere along its path is the instantaneous velocity,
usually called simply velocity. It is the average velocity between two points on the path in the limit that the time
(and therefore the displacement) between the two events approaches zero. To illustrate this idea mathematically,
we need to express position x as a continuous function of tdenoted by x(t ). The expression for the average velocity
between two points using this notation is . To find the instantaneous velocity at any position, we let
and limit as . After inserting these expressions into the equation for the average velocity and taking the
, we find the expression for the instantaneous velocity:
INSTANTANEOUS VELOCITY
The instantaneous velocity of an object is the limit of the average velocity as the elapsed time approaches zero,
or the derivative of x with respect to t :
3.4
Like average velocity, instantaneous velocity is a vector with dimension of length per time. The instantaneous
velocity at a specific time point is the rate of change of the position function, which is the slope of the position
function at . Figure 3.6 shows how the average velocity between two times approaches the
instantaneous velocity at The instantaneous velocity is shown at time , which happens to be at the maximum
of the position function. The slope of the position graph is zero at this point, and thus the instantaneous velocity is
zero. At other times, , and so on, the instantaneous velocity is not zero because the slope of the position graph
would be positive or negative. If the position function had a minimum, the slope of the position graph would also be
zero, giving an instantaneous velocity of zero there as well. Thus, the zeros of the velocity function give the minimum
and maximum of the position function.
FIGURE 3.6 In a graph of position versus time, the instantaneous velocity is the slope of the tangent line at a given point. The average
are shown. When , the average velocity
velocities between times approaches the instantaneous velocity at .
EXAMPLE 3.2
Finding Velocity from a Position-Versus-Time Graph
Given the position-versus-time graph of Figure 3.7, find the velocity-versus-time graph.
102 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.7 The object starts out in the positive direction, stops for a short time, and then reverses direction, heading back toward the
origin. Notice that the object comes to rest instantaneously, which would require an infinite force. Thus, the graph is an approximation of
motion in the real world. (The concept of force is discussed in Newton’s Laws of Motion.)
Strategy
The graph contains three straight lines during three time intervals. We find the velocity during each time interval by
taking the slope of the line using the grid.
Solution
Time interval 0 s to 0.5 s:
Time interval 0.5 s to 1.0 s:
Time interval 1.0 s to 2.0 s:
The graph of these values of velocity versus time is shown in Figure 3.8.
FIGURE 3.8 The velocity is positive for the first part of the trip, zero when the object is stopped, and negative when the object reverses
direction.
Significance
During the time interval between 0 s and 0.5 s, the object’s position is moving away from the origin and the position-
versus-time curve has a positive slope. At any point along the curve during this time interval, we can find the
instantaneous velocity by taking its slope, which is +1 m/s, as shown in Figure 3.8. In the subsequent time interval,
between 0.5 s and 1.0 s, the position doesn’t change and we see the slope is zero. From 1.0 s to 2.0 s, the object is
moving back toward the origin and the slope is −0.5 m/s. The object has reversed direction and has a negative
velocity.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.2 • Instantaneous Velocity and Speed 103
Speed
In everyday language, most people use the terms speedand velocity interchangeably. In physics, however, they do
not have the same meaning and are distinct concepts. One major difference is that speed has no direction; that is,
speed is a scalar.
We can calculate the average speed by finding the total distance traveled divided by the elapsed time:
3.5
Average speed is not necessarily the same as the magnitude of the average velocity, which is found by dividing the
magnitude of the total displacement by the elapsed time. For example, if a trip starts and ends at the same location,
the total displacement is zero, and therefore the average velocity is zero. The average speed, however, is not zero,
because the total distance traveled is greater than zero. If we take a road trip of 300 km and need to be at our
destination at a certain time, then we would be interested in our average speed.
However, we can calculate the instantaneous speed from the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity:
3.6
If a particle is moving along the x-axis at +7.0 m/s and another particle is moving along the same axis at −7.0 m/s,
they have different velocities, but both have the same speed of 7.0 m/s. Some typical speeds are shown in the
following table.
Speed m/s mi/h
Continental drift
Brisk walk 1.7 3.9
Cyclist 4.4 10
Sprint runner 12.2 27
Rural speed limit 24.6 56
Official land speed record 341.1 763
Speed of sound at sea level 343 768
Space shuttle on reentry 7800 17,500
Escape velocity of Earth* 11,200 25,000
Orbital speed of Earth around the Sun 29,783 66,623
Speed of light in a vacuum 299,792,458 670,616,629
TABLE 3.1 Speeds of Various Objects *Escape velocity is the velocity at which an
object must be launched so that it overcomes Earth’s gravity and is not pulled back
toward Earth.
Calculating Instantaneous Velocity
When calculating instantaneous velocity, we need to specify the explicit form of the position function . If each
term in the equation has the form of where is a constant and is an integer, this can be differentiated
104 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
using the power rule to be:
3.7
Note that if there are additional terms added together, this power rule of differentiation can be done multiple times
and the solution is the sum of those terms. The following example illustrates the use of Equation 3.7.
EXAMPLE 3.3
Instantaneous Velocity Versus Average Velocity
The position of a particle is given by .
a. b. Using Equation 3.4 and Equation 3.7, find the instantaneous velocity at Calculate the average velocity between 1.0 s and 3.0 s.
Strategy
s.
Equation 3.4 gives the instantaneous velocity of the particle as the derivative of the position function. Looking at the
form of the position function given, we see that it is a polynomial in t . Therefore, we can use Equation 3.7, the power
rule from calculus, to find the solution. We use Equation 3.6 to calculate the average velocity of the particle.
Solution
a. .
b. Substituting t= 2.0 s into this equation gives .
To determine the average velocity of the particle between 1.0 s and 3.0 s, we calculate the values of x(1.0 s)
and x(3.0 s):
Then the average velocity is
Significance
In the limit that the time interval used to calculate v .
goes to zero, the value obtained for converges to the value of
EXAMPLE 3.4
Instantaneous Velocity Versus Speed
Consider the motion of a particle in which the position is .
a. b. What is the instantaneous velocity at t= 0.25 s, t= 0.50 s, and t= 1.0 s?
What is the speed of the particle at these times?
Strategy
The instantaneous velocity is the derivative of the position function and the speed is the magnitude of the
instantaneous velocity. We use Equation 3.4 and Equation 3.7 to solve for instantaneous velocity.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 105
Solution
a.
b.
Significance
The velocity of the particle gives us direction information, indicating the particle is moving to the left (west) or right
(east). The speed gives the magnitude of the velocity. By graphing the position, velocity, and speed as functions of
time, we can understand these concepts visually Figure 3.9. In (a), the graph shows the particle moving in the
positive direction until t= 0.5 s, when it reverses direction. The reversal of direction can also be seen in (b) at 0.5 s
where the velocity is zero and then turns negative. At 1.0 s it is back at the origin where it started. The particle’s
velocity at 1.0 s in (b) is negative, because it is traveling in the negative direction. But in (c), however, its speed is
positive and remains positive throughout the travel time. We can also interpret velocity as the slope of the position-
versus-time graph. The slope of x(t ) is decreasing toward zero, becoming zero at 0.5 s and increasingly negative
thereafter. This analysis of comparing the graphs of position, velocity, and speed helps catch errors in calculations.
The graphs must be consistent with each other and help interpret the calculations.
FIGURE 3.9 (a) Position: x(t ) versus time. (b) Velocity: v(t ) versus time. The slope of the position graph is the velocity. A rough comparison
of the slopes of the tangent lines in (a) at 0.25 s, 0.5 s, and 1.0 s with the values for velocity at the corresponding times indicates they are
the same values. (c) Speed: versus time. Speed is always a positive number.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.2
The position of an object as a function of time is function of time? (b) Is the velocity ever positive? (c) What are the velocity and speed at t= 1.0 s?
. (a) What is the velocity of the object as a
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the average acceleration between two points in time.
• Calculate the instantaneous acceleration given the functional form of velocity.
• Explain the vector nature of instantaneous acceleration and velocity.
• Explain the difference between average acceleration and instantaneous acceleration.
• Find instantaneous acceleration at a specified time on a graph of velocity versus time.
The importance of understanding acceleration spans our day-to-day experience, as well as the vast reaches of outer
space and the tiny world of subatomic physics. In everyday conversation, to accelerat e means to speed up; applying
the brake pedal causes a vehicle to slow down. We are familiar with the acceleration of our car, for example. The
greater the acceleration, the greater the change in velocity over a given time. Acceleration is widely seen in
experimental physics. In linear particle accelerator experiments, for example, subatomic particles are accelerated
to very high velocities in collision experiments, which tell us information about the structure of the subatomic world
106 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
as well as the origin of the universe. In space, cosmic rays are subatomic particles that have been accelerated to
very high energies in supernovas (exploding massive stars) and active galactic nuclei. It is important to understand
the processes that accelerate cosmic rays because these rays contain highly penetrating radiation that can damage
electronics flown on spacecraft, for example.
Average Acceleration
The formal definition of acceleration is consistent with these notions just described, but is more inclusive.
AVERAGE ACCELERATION
Average acceleration is the rate at which velocity changes:
3.8
where is average acceleration, v is velocity, and tis time. (The bar over the a means averag e acceleration.)
Because acceleration is velocity in meters per second divided by time in seconds, the SI units for acceleration are
often abbreviated m/s2—that is, meters per second squared or meters per second per second. This literally means
by how many meters per second the velocity changes every second. Recall that velocity is a vector—it has both
magnitude and direction—which means that a change in velocity can be a change in magnitude (or speed), but it can
also be a change in direction. For example, if a runner traveling at 10 km/h due east slows to a stop, reverses
direction, and continues her run at 10 km/h due west, her velocity has changed as a result of the change in direction,
although the magnitude of the velocity is the same in both directions. Thus, acceleration occurs when velocity
changes in magnitude (an increase or decrease in speed) or in direction, or both.
ACCELERATION AS A VECTOR
Acceleration is a vector in the same direction as the chang e in velocity, . Since velocity is a vector, it can
change in magnitude or in direction, or both. Acceleration is, therefore, a change in speed or direction, or both.
Keep in mind that although acceleration is in the direction of the change in velocity, it is not always in the direction of
motion. When an object slows down, its acceleration is opposite to the direction of its motion. Although this is
commonly referred to as deceleration Figure 3.10, we say the train is accelerating in a direction opposite to its
direction of motion.
FIGURE 3.10 A subway train in Sao Paulo, Brazil, accelerates opposite to the motion as it comes into a station. It is accelerating in a
direction opposite to its direction of motion. (credit: modification of work by Yusuke Kawasaki)
The term deceleration can cause confusion in our analysis because it is not a vector and it does not point to a
specific direction with respect to a coordinate system, so we do not use it. Acceleration is a vector, so we must
choose the appropriate sign for it in our chosen coordinate system. In the case of the train in Figure 3.10,
Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 107
acceleration is in the neg ative direction in the chosen coordinat e s yst em, so we say the train is undergoing negative
acceleration.
If an object in motion has a velocity in the positive direction with respect to a chosen origin and it acquires a
constant negative acceleration, the object eventually comes to a rest and reverses direction. If we wait long enough,
the object passes through the origin going in the opposite direction. This is illustrated in Figure 3.11.
FIGURE 3.11 An object in motion with a velocity vector toward the east under negative acceleration comes to a rest and reverses direction.
It passes the origin going in the opposite direction after a long enough time.
EXAMPLE 3.5
Calculating Average Acceleration: A Racehorse Leaves the Gate
A racehorse coming out of the gate accelerates from rest to a velocity of 15.0 m/s due west in 1.80 s. What is its
average acceleration?
FIGURE 3.12 Racehorses accelerating out of the gate. (credit: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Strategy
First we draw a sketch and assign a coordinate system to the problem Figure 3.13. This is a simple problem, but it
always helps to visualize it. Notice that we assign east as positive and west as negative. Thus, in this case, we have
negative velocity.
FIGURE 3.13 Identify the coordinate system, the given information, and what you want to determine.
from the given information, and then calculating the average
We can solve this problem by identifying acceleration directly from the equation .
108 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
(the negative sign indicates direction toward the west), Δt= 1.80
Solution
First, identify the knowns: s.
Second, find the change in velocity. Since the horse is going from zero to –15.0 m/s, its change in velocity equals its
final velocity:
Last, substitute the known values ( ) and solve for the unknown :
Significance
The negative sign for acceleration indicates that acceleration is toward the west. An acceleration of 8.33 m/s2 due
west means the horse increases its velocity by 8.33 m/s due west each second; that is, 8.33 meters per second per
second, which we write as 8.33 m/s2. This is truly an average acceleration, because the ride is not smooth. We see
later that an acceleration of this magnitude would require the rider to hang on with a force nearly equal to his
weight.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.3
Protons in a linear accelerator are accelerated from rest to acceleration of the protons?
in 10–4 s. What is the average
Instantaneous Acceleration
Instantaneous acceleration a, or acceleration at a specific instant in time, is obtained using the same process
discussed for instantaneous velocity. That is, we calculate the average acceleration between two points in time
separated by and let approach zero. The result is the derivative of the velocity function v(t ), which is
instantaneous acceleration and is expressed mathematically as
3.9
Thus, similar to velocity being the derivative of the position function, instantaneous acceleration is the derivative of
the velocity function. We can show this graphically in the same way as instantaneous velocity. In Figure 3.14,
instantaneous acceleration at time t 0 is the slope of the tangent line to the velocity-versus-time graph at time t 0. We
see that average acceleration approaches instantaneous acceleration as approaches zero. Also in part
(a) of the figure, we see that velocity has a maximum when its slope is zero. This time corresponds to the zero of the
acceleration function. In part (b), instantaneous acceleration at the minimum velocity is shown, which is also zero,
since the slope of the curve is zero there, too. Thus, for a given velocity function, the zeros of the acceleration
function give either the minimum or the maximum velocity.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 109
FIGURE 3.14 In a graph of velocity versus time, instantaneous acceleration is the slope of the tangent line. (a) Shown is average
acceleration between times , and . When , the average acceleration
approaches instantaneous acceleration at time t 0. In view (a), instantaneous acceleration is shown for the point on the velocity curve at
maximum velocity. At this point, instantaneous acceleration is the slope of the tangent line, which is zero. At any other time, the slope of the
tangent line—and thus instantaneous acceleration—would not be zero. (b) Same as (a) but shown for instantaneous acceleration at
minimum velocity.
To illustrate this concept, let’s look at two examples. First, a simple example is shown using Figure 3.9(b), the
velocity-versus-time graph of Example 3.4, to find acceleration graphically. This graph is depicted in Figure 3.15(a),
which is a straight line. The corresponding graph of acceleration versus time is found from the slope of velocity and
is shown in Figure 3.15(b). In this example, the velocity function is a straight line with a constant slope, thus
acceleration is a constant. In the next example, the velocity function has a more complicated functional dependence
on time.
FIGURE 3.15 (a, b) The velocity-versus-time graph is linear and has a negative constant slope (a) that is equal to acceleration, shown in (b).
If we know the functional form of velocity, v(t ), we can calculate instantaneous acceleration a(t ) at any time point in
the motion using Equation 3.9.
EXAMPLE 3.6
Calculating Instantaneous Acceleration
A particle is in motion and is accelerating. The functional form of the velocity is .
a. Find the functional form of the acceleration.
110 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
b. c. d. Find the instantaneous velocity at t= 1, 2, 3, and 5 s.
Find the instantaneous acceleration at t= 1, 2, 3, and 5 s.
Interpret the results of (c) in terms of the directions of the acceleration and velocity vectors.
Strategy
We find the functional form of acceleration by taking the derivative of the velocity function. Then, we calculate the
values of instantaneous velocity and acceleration from the given functions for each. For part (d), we need to
compare the directions of velocity and acceleration at each time.
Solution
a.
b. , , ,
c. , , ,
d. At t= 1 s, velocity is positive and acceleration is positive, so both velocity and acceleration are
in the same direction. The particle is moving faster.
At t= 2 s, velocity has increased to , where it is maximum, which corresponds to the time when the
acceleration is zero. We see that the maximum velocity occurs when the slope of the velocity function is zero, which
is just the zero of the acceleration function.
At t= 3 s, velocity is and acceleration is negative. The particle has reduced its velocity and the
acceleration vector is negative. The particle is slowing down.
At t= 5 s, velocity is and acceleration is increasingly negative. Between the times t = 3 s and t= 5
s the particle has decreased its velocity to zero and then become negative, thus reversing its direction. The particle
is now speeding up again, but in the opposite direction.
We can see these results graphically in Figure 3.16.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.3 • Average and Instantaneous Acceleration 111
FIGURE 3.16 (a) Velocity versus time. Tangent lines are indicated at times 1, 2, and 3 s. The slopes of the tangent lines are the
accelerations. At t= 3 s, velocity is positive. At t= 5 s, velocity is negative, indicating the particle has reversed direction. (b) Acceleration
versus time. Comparing the values of accelerations given by the black dots with the corresponding slopes of the tangent lines (slopes of
lines through black dots) in (a), we see they are identical.
Significance
By doing both a numerical and graphical analysis of velocity and acceleration of the particle, we can learn much
about its motion. The numerical analysis complements the graphical analysis in giving a total view of the motion.
The zero of the acceleration function corresponds to the maximum of the velocity in this example. Also in this
example, when acceleration is positive and in the same direction as velocity, velocity increases. As acceleration
tends toward zero, eventually becoming negative, the velocity reaches a maximum, after which it starts decreasing.
If we wait long enough, velocity also becomes negative, indicating a reversal of direction. A real-world example of
this type of motion is a car with a velocity that is increasing to a maximum, after which it starts slowing down, comes
to a stop, then reverses direction.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.4
An airplane lands on a runway traveling east. Describe its acceleration.
112 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Getting a Feel for Acceleration
You are probably used to experiencing acceleration when you step into an elevator, or step on the gas pedal in your
car. However, acceleration is happening to many other objects in our universe with which we don’t have direct
contact. Table 3.2 presents the acceleration of various objects. We can see the magnitudes of the accelerations
extend over many orders of magnitude.
Acceleration Value (m/s2)
High-speed train 0.25
Elevator 2
Cheetah 5
Object in a free fall without air resistance near the surface of Earth 9.8
Space shuttle maximum during launch 29
Parachutist peak during normal opening of parachute 59
F16 aircraft pulling out of a dive 79
Explosive seat ejection from aircraft 147
Sprint missile 982
Fastest rocket sled peak acceleration 1540
Jumping flea 3200
Baseball struck by a bat 30,000
Closing jaws of a trap-jaw ant 1,000,000
Proton in the large Hadron collider
TABLE 3.2 Typical Values of Acceleration (credit: Wikipedia: Orders of Magnitude (acceleration))
In this table, we see that typical accelerations vary widely with different objects and have nothing to do with object
size or how massive it is. Acceleration can also vary widely with time during the motion of an object. A drag racer has
a large acceleration just after its start, but then it tapers off as the vehicle reaches a constant velocity. Its average
acceleration can be quite different from its instantaneous acceleration at a particular time during its motion. Figure
3.17 compares graphically average acceleration with instantaneous acceleration for two very different motions.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 113
FIGURE 3.17 Graphs of instantaneous acceleration versus time for two different one-dimensional motions. (a) Acceleration varies only
slightly and is always in the same direction, since it is positive. The average over the interval is nearly the same as the acceleration at any
given time. (b) Acceleration varies greatly, perhaps representing a package on a post office conveyor belt that is accelerated forward and
backward as it bumps along. It is necessary to consider small time intervals (such as from 0–1.0 s) with constant or nearly constant
acceleration in such a situation.
INTERACTIVE
Learn about position, velocity, and acceleration graphs. Move the little man back and forth with a mouse and plot his
motion. Set the position, velocity, or acceleration and let the simulation move the man for you. Visit this link
(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21movmansimul) to use the moving man simulation.
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify which equations of motion are to be used to solve for unknowns.
• Use appropriate equations of motion to solve a two-body pursuit problem.
You might guess that the greater the acceleration of, say, a car moving away from a stop sign, the greater the car’s
displacement in a given time. But, we have not developed a specific equation that relates acceleration and
displacement. In this section, we look at some convenient equations for kinematic relationships, starting from the
definitions of displacement, velocity, and acceleration. We first investigate a single object in motion, called single-
body motion. Then we investigate the motion of two objects, called two-body pursuit problems.
Notation
First, let us make some simplifications in notation. Taking the initial time to be zero, as if time is measured with a
stopwatch, is a great simplification. Since elapsed time is , taking means that , the final
time on the stopwatch. When initial time is taken to be zero, we use the subscript 0 to denote initial values of
position and velocity. That is, is the initial position and is the initial velocity. We put no subscripts on the final
values. That is, t is the final time, x is the final position, and v is the final velocity. This gives a simpler expression for
elapsed time, . It also simplifies the expression for x displacement, which is now . Also, it
simplifies the expression for change in velocity, which is now . To summarize, using the simplified
notation, with the initial time taken to be zero,
114 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
where the subscript 0 denotes an initial value and the absence of a subscript denotes a final value in whatever
motion is under consideration.
We now make the important assumption that acceleration is constant . This assumption allows us to avoid using
calculus to find instantaneous acceleration. Since acceleration is constant, the average and instantaneous
accelerations are equal—that is,
Thus, we can use the symbol a for acceleration at all times. Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriously
limit the situations we can study nor does it degrade the accuracy of our treatment. For one thing, acceleration is
constant in a great number of situations. Furthermore, in many other situations we can describe motion accurately
by assuming a constant acceleration equal to the average acceleration for that motion. Lastly, for motion during
which acceleration changes drastically, such as a car accelerating to top speed and then braking to a stop, motion
can be considered in separate parts, each of which has its own constant acceleration.
Displacement and Position from Velocity
To get our first two equations, we start with the definition of average velocity:
Substituting the simplified notation for and yields
Solving for x gives us
3.10
where the average velocity is
3.11
The equation reflects the fact that when acceleration is constant, is just the simple average of the initial
and final velocities. Figure 3.18 illustrates this concept graphically. In part (a) of the figure, acceleration is constant,
with velocity increasing at a constant rate. The average velocity during the 1-h interval from 40 km/h to 80 km/h is
60 km/h:
In part (b), acceleration is not constant. During the 1-h interval, velocity is closer to 80 km/h than 40 km/h. Thus,
the average velocity is greater than in part (a).
Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 115
FIGURE 3.18 (a) Velocity-versus-time graph with constant acceleration showing the initial and final velocities . The average
velocity is given by . (b) Velocity-versus-time graph with an acceleration that changes with time. The average velocity is not
, but is greater than 60 km/h.
Solving for Final Velocity from Acceleration and Time
We can derive another useful equation by manipulating the definition of acceleration:
Substituting the simplified notation for and gives us
Solving for v yields
3.12
EXAMPLE 3.7
Calculating Final Velocity
An airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and then accelerates opposite to the motion at 1.50 m/s2 for
40.0 s. What is its final velocity?
Strategy
First, we identify the knowns: .
Second, we identify the unknown; in this case, it is final velocity .
Last, we determine which equation to use. To do this we figure out which kinematic equation gives the unknown in
terms of the knowns. We calculate the final velocity using Equation 3.12, .
Solution
Substitute the known values and solve:
Figure 3.19 is a sketch that shows the acceleration and velocity vectors.
116 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.19 The airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and slows to a final velocity of 10.0 m/s before heading for the terminal.
Note the acceleration is negative because its direction is opposite to its velocity, which is positive.
Significance
The final velocity is much less than the initial velocity, as desired when slowing down, but is still positive (see figure).
With jet engines, reverse thrust can be maintained long enough to stop the plane and start moving it backward,
which is indicated by a negative final velocity, but is not the case here.
In addition to being useful in problem solving, the equation among velocity, acceleration, and time. We can see, for example, that
gives us insight into the relationships
• Final velocity depends on how large the acceleration is and how long it lasts
• If the acceleration is zero, then the final velocity equals the initial velocity (v = v0), as expected (in other
words, velocity is constant)
• If a is negative, then the final velocity is less than the initial velocity
All these observations fit our intuition. Note that it is always useful to examine basic equations in light of our
intuition and experience to check that they do indeed describe nature accurately.
Solving for Final Position with Constant Acceleration
We can combine the previous equations to find a third equation that allows us to calculate the final position of an
object experiencing constant acceleration. We start with
Adding to each side of this equation and dividing by 2 gives
Since for constant acceleration, we have
Now we substitute this expression for into the equation for displacement, , yielding
3.13
EXAMPLE 3.8
Calculating Displacement of an Accelerating Object
Dragsters can achieve an average acceleration of 26.0 m/s2. Suppose a dragster accelerates from rest at this rate
for 5.56 s (Figure 3.20). How far does it travel in this time?
Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 117
FIGURE 3.20 U.S. Army Top Fuel pilot Tony “The Sarge” Schumacher begins a race with a controlled burnout. (credit: Lt. Col. William
Thurmond. Photo Courtesy of U.S. Army.)
Strategy
First, let’s draw a sketch (Figure 3.21). We are asked to find displacement, which is x if we take to be zero. (Think
about as the starting line of a race. It can be anywhere, but we call it zero and measure all other positions relative
to it.) We can use the equation when we identify , , and tfrom the statement of the
problem.
FIGURE 3.21 Sketch of an accelerating dragster.
Solution
5.56 s.
First, we need to identify the knowns. Starting from rest means that , a is given as 26.0 m/s2 and tis given as
Second, we substitute the known values into the equation to solve for the unknown:
Since the initial position and velocity are both zero, this equation simplifies to
Substituting the identified values of a and tgives
Significance
If we convert 402 m to miles, we find that the distance covered is very close to one-quarter of a mile, the standard
distance for drag racing. So, our answer is reasonable. This is an impressive displacement to cover in only 5.56 s,
118 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
but top-notch dragsters can do a quarter mile in even less time than this. If the dragster were given an initial
velocity, this would add another term to the distance equation. If the same acceleration and time are used in the
equation, the distance covered would be much greater.
What else can we learn by examining the equation We can see the following relationships:
• Displacement depends on the square of the elapsed time when acceleration is not zero. In Example 3.8, the
dragster covers only one-fourth of the total distance in the first half of the elapsed time.
• If acceleration is zero, then initial velocity equals average velocity , and
Solving for Final Velocity from Distance and Acceleration
A fourth useful equation can be obtained from another algebraic manipulation of previous equations. If we solve
for t , we get
Substituting this and into , we get
3.14
EXAMPLE 3.9
is ideally suited to this task because it relates velocities, acceleration, and
Calculating Final Velocity
Calculate the final velocity of the dragster in Example 3.8 without using information about time.
Strategy
The equation displacement, and no time information is required.
Solution
First, we identify the known values. We know that v0 = 0, since the dragster starts from rest. We also know that x −
x0 = 402 m (this was the answer in Example 3.8). The average acceleration was given by a = 26.0 m/s2
.
Second, we substitute the knowns into the equation and solve for v:
Thus,
Significance
A velocity of 145 m/s is about 522 km/h, or about 324 mi/h, but even this breakneck speed is short of the record for
the quarter mile. Also, note that a square root has two values; we took the positive value to indicate a velocity in the
same direction as the acceleration.
An examination of the equation among physical quantities:
• The final velocity depends on how large the acceleration is and the distance over which it acts.
can produce additional insights into the general relationships
Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 119
• For a fixed acceleration, a car that is going twice as fast doesn’t simply stop in twice the distance. It takes
much farther to stop. (This is why we have reduced speed zones near schools.)
Putting Equations Together
In the following examples, we continue to explore one-dimensional motion, but in situations requiring slightly more
algebraic manipulation. The examples also give insight into problem-solving techniques. The note that follows is
provided for easy reference to the equations needed. Be aware that these equations are not independent. In many
situations we have two unknowns and need two equations from the set to solve for the unknowns. We need as many
equations as there are unknowns to solve a given situation.
SUMMARY OF KINEMATIC EQUATIONS (CONSTANT A)
Before we get into the examples, let’s look at some of the equations more closely to see the behavior of acceleration
at extreme values. Rearranging Equation 3.12, we have
From this we see that, for a finite time, if the difference between the initial and final velocities is small, the
acceleration is small, approaching zero in the limit that the initial and final velocities are equal. On the contrary, in
the limit for a finite difference between the initial and final velocities, acceleration becomes infinite.
Similarly, rearranging Equation 3.14, we can express acceleration in terms of velocities and displacement:
Thus, for a finite difference between the initial and final velocities acceleration becomes infinite in the limit the
displacement approaches zero. Acceleration approaches zero in the limit the difference in initial and final velocities
approaches zero for a finite displacement.
EXAMPLE 3.10
How Far Does a Car Go?
On dry concrete, a car can accelerate opposite to the motion at a rate of 7.00 m/s2, whereas on wet concrete it can
accelerate opposite to the motion at only 5.00 m/s2. Find the distances necessary to stop a car moving at 30.0 m/s
(about 110 km/h) on (a) dry concrete and (b) wet concrete. (c) Repeat both calculations and find the displacement
from the point where the driver sees a traffic light turn red, taking into account their reaction time of 0.500 s to get
their foot on the brake.
Strategy
First, we need to draw a sketch Figure 3.22. To determine which equations are best to use, we need to list all the
known values and identify exactly what we need to solve for.
120 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
FIGURE 3.22 Sample sketch to visualize acceleration opposite to the motion and stopping distance of a car.
Solution
a. First, we need to identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that v0 = 30.0 m/s, v = 0, and a
= −7.00 m/s2 (a is negative because it is in a direction opposite to velocity). We take x0 to be zero. We are
looking for displacement , or x − x0.
Second, we identify the equation that will help us solve the problem. The best equation to use is
This equation is best because it includes only one unknown, x. We know the values of all the other variables in
this equation. (Other equations would allow us to solve for x, but they require us to know the stopping time, t ,
which we do not know. We could use them, but it would entail additional calculations.)
Third, we rearrange the equation to solve for x:
and substitute the known values:
Thus,
b. This part can be solved in exactly the same manner as (a). The only difference is that the acceleration is −5.00
m/s2. The result is
c. When the driver reacts, the stopping distance is the same as it is in (a) and (b) for dry and wet concrete. So, to
answer this question, we need to calculate how far the car travels during the reaction time, and then add that
to the stopping time. It is reasonable to assume the velocity remains constant during the driver’s reaction
time.
To do this, we, again, identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that ,
, and . We take to be zero. We are looking for .
Second, as before, we identify the best equation to use. In this case, works well because the only
unknown value is x, which is what we want to solve for.
Third, we substitute the knowns to solve the equation:
This means the car travels 15.0 m while the driver reacts, making the total displacements in the two cases of
dry and wet concrete 15.0 m greater than if he reacted instantly.
Last, we then add the displacement during the reaction time to the displacement when braking (Figure 3.23),
and find (a) to be 64.3 m + 15.0 m = 79.3 m when dry and (b) to be 90.0 m + 15.0 m = 105 m when wet.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 121
FIGURE 3.23 The distance necessary to stop a car varies greatly, depending on road conditions and driver reaction time. Shown here are
the braking distances for dry and wet pavement, as calculated in this example, for a car traveling initially at 30.0 m/s. Also shown are the
total distances traveled from the point when the driver first sees a light turn red, assuming a 0.500-s reaction time.
Significance
The displacements found in this example seem reasonable for stopping a fast-moving car. It should take longer to
stop a car on wet pavement than dry. It is interesting that reaction time adds significantly to the displacements, but
more important is the general approach to solving problems. We identify the knowns and the quantities to be
determined, then find an appropriate equation. If there is more than one unknown, we need as many independent
equations as there are unknowns to solve. There is often more than one way to solve a problem. The various parts of
this example can, in fact, be solved by other methods, but the solutions presented here are the shortest.
EXAMPLE 3.11
Calculating Time
Suppose a car merges into freeway traffic on a 200-m-long ramp. If its initial velocity is 10.0 m/s and it accelerates
at 2.00 m/s2, how long does it take the car to travel the 200 m up the ramp? (Such information might be useful to a
traffic engineer.)
Strategy
First, we draw a sketch Figure 3.24. We are asked to solve for time t . As before, we identify the known quantities to
choose a convenient physical relationship (that is, an equation with one unknown, t .)
FIGURE 3.24 Sketch of a car accelerating on a freeway ramp.
Solution
Again, we identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that
, and x = 200 m.
We need to solve for t . The equation works best because the only unknown in the equation is
the variable t , for which we need to solve. From this insight we see that when we input the knowns into the equation,
we end up with a quadratic equation.
122 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
We need to rearrange the equation to solve for t , then substituting the knowns into the equation:
We then simplify the equation. The units of meters cancel because they are in each term. We can get the units of
seconds to cancel by taking t= ts, where tis the magnitude of time and s is the unit. Doing so leaves
We then use the quadratic formula to solve for t ,
which yields two solutions: t= 10.0 and t= −20.0. A negative value for time is unreasonable, since it would mean
the event happened 20 s before the motion began. We can discard that solution. Thus,
Significance
Whenever an equation contains an unknown squared, there are two solutions. In some problems both solutions are
meaningful; in others, only one solution is reasonable. The 10.0-s answer seems reasonable for a typical freeway
on-ramp.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.5
A rocket accelerates at a rate of 20 m/s2 during launch. How long does it take the rocket to reach a velocity of 400
m/s?
EXAMPLE 3.12
Acceleration of a Spaceship
A spaceship has left Earth’s orbit and is on its way to the Moon. It accelerates at 20 m/s2 for 2 min and covers a
distance of 1000 km. What are the initial and final velocities of the spaceship?
Strategy
We are asked to find the initial and final velocities of the spaceship. Looking at the kinematic equations, we see that
one equation will not give the answer. We must use one kinematic equation to solve for one of the velocities and
substitute it into another kinematic equation to get the second velocity. Thus, we solve two of the kinematic
equations simultaneously.
Solution
First we solve for using
Then we substitute into to solve for the final velocity:
Access for free at openstax.org
3.4 • Motion with Constant Acceleration 123
Significance
There are six variables in displacement, time, velocity, and acceleration that describe motion in one dimension. The
initial conditions of a given problem can be many combinations of these variables. Because of this diversity,
solutions may not be as easy as simple substitutions into one of the equations. This example illustrates that
solutions to kinematics may require solving two simultaneous kinematic equations.
With the basics of kinematics established, we can go on to many other interesting examples and applications. In the
process of developing kinematics, we have also glimpsed a general approach to problem solving that produces both
correct answers and insights into physical relationships. The next level of complexity in our kinematics problems
involves the motion of two interrelated bodies, called two-body pursuit problems.
Two-Body Pursuit Problems
Up until this point we have looked at examples of motion involving a single body. Even for the problem with two cars
and the stopping distances on wet and dry roads, we divided this problem into two separate problems to find the
answers. In a two-body pursuit problem, the motions of the objects are coupled—meaning, the unknown we seek
depends on the motion of both objects. To solve these problems we write the equations of motion for each object
and then solve them simultaneously to find the unknown. This is illustrated in Figure 3.25.
FIGURE 3.25 A two-body pursuit scenario where car 2 has a constant velocity and car 1 is behind with a constant acceleration. Car 1
catches up with car 2 at a later time.
The time and distance required for car 1 to catch car 2 depends on the initial distance car 1 is from car 2 as well as
the velocities of both cars and the acceleration of car 1. The kinematic equations describing the motion of both cars
must be solved to find these unknowns.
Consider the following example.
EXAMPLE 3.13
Cheetah Catching a Gazelle
A cheetah waits in hiding behind a bush. The cheetah spots a gazelle running past at 10 m/s. At the instant the
gazelle passes the cheetah, the cheetah accelerates from rest at 4 m/s2 to catch the gazelle. (a) How long does it
take the cheetah to catch the gazelle? (b) What is the displacement of the gazelle and cheetah?
Strategy
We use the set of equations for constant acceleration to solve this problem. Since there are two objects in motion,
we have separate equations of motion describing each animal. But what links the equations is a common parameter
that has the same value for each animal. If we look at the problem closely, it is clear the common parameter to each
animal is their position x at a later time t . Since they both start at , their displacements are the same at a later
time t , when the cheetah catches up with the gazelle. If we pick the equation of motion that solves for the
displacement for each animal, we can then set the equations equal to each other and solve for the unknown, which
is time.
Solution
a. Equation for the gazelle: The gazelle has a constant velocity, which is its average velocity, since it is not
accelerating. Therefore, we use Equation 3.10 with :
124 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Equation for the cheetah: The cheetah is accelerating from rest, so we use Equation 3.13 with and
:
Now we have an equation of motion for each animal with a common parameter, which can be eliminated to
find the solution. In this case, we solve for t :
The gazelle has a constant velocity of 10 m/s, which is its average velocity. The acceleration of the cheetah is
4 m/s2. Evaluating t , the time for the cheetah to reach the gazelle, we have
b. To get the displacement, we use either the equation of motion for the cheetah or the gazelle, since they should
both give the same answer.
Displacement of the cheetah:
Displacement of the gazelle:
We see that both displacements are equal, as expected.
Significance
It is important to analyze the motion of each object and to use the appropriate kinematic equations to describe the
individual motion. It is also important to have a good visual perspective of the two-body pursuit problem to see the
common parameter that links the motion of both objects.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.6
A bicycle has a constant velocity of 10 m/s. A person starts from rest and begins to run to catch up to the bicycle in
30 s when the bicycle is at the same position as the person. What is the acceleration of the person?
3.5 Free Fall
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use the kinematic equations with the variables y and g to analyze free-fall motion.
• Describe how the values of the position, velocity, and acceleration change during a free fall.
• Solve for the position, velocity, and acceleration as functions of time when an object is in a free fall.
An interesting application of Equation 3.4 through Equation 3.14 is called free fal l , which describes the motion of an
object falling in a gravitational field, such as near the surface of Earth or other celestial objects of planetary size.
Let’s assume the body is falling in a straight line perpendicular to the surface, so its motion is one-dimensional. For
example, we can estimate the depth of a vertical mine shaft by dropping a rock into it and listening for the rock to hit
the bottom. But “falling,” in the context of free fall, does not necessarily imply the body is moving from a greater
height to a lesser height. If a ball is thrown upward, the equations of free fall apply equally to its ascent as well as its
descent.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.5 • Free Fall 125
Gravity
The most remarkable and unexpected fact about falling objects is that if air resistance and friction are negligible,
then in a given location all objects fall toward the center of Earth with the same constant acceleration, independent
of their mass. This experimentally determined fact is unexpected because we are so accustomed to the effects of air
resistance and friction that we expect light objects to fall slower than heavy ones. Until Galileo Galilei (1564–1642)
proved otherwise, people believed that a heavier object has a greater acceleration in a free fall. We now know this is
not the case. In the absence of air resistance, heavy objects arrive at the ground at the same time as lighter objects
when dropped from the same height Figure 3.26.
FIGURE 3.26 A hammer and a feather fall with the same constant acceleration if air resistance is negligible. This is a general characteristic
of gravity not unique to Earth, as astronaut David R. Scott demonstrated in 1971 on the Moon, where the acceleration from gravity is only
1.67 m/s2 and there is no atmosphere.
In the real world, air resistance can cause a lighter object to fall slower than a heavier object of the same size. A
tennis ball reaches the ground after a baseball dropped at the same time. (It might be difficult to observe the
difference if the height is not large.) Air resistance opposes the motion of an object through the air, and friction
between objects—such as between clothes and a laundry chute or between a stone and a pool into which it is
dropped—also opposes motion between them.
For the ideal situations of these first few chapters, an object fal ling without air resistance or friction is defined to be
in free fall. The force of gravity causes objects to fall toward the center of Earth. The acceleration of free-falling
objects is therefore called acceleration due to gravity. Acceleration due to gravity is constant, which means we can
apply the kinematic equations to any falling object where air resistance and friction are negligible. This opens to us a
broad class of interesting situations.
Acceleration due to gravity is so important that its magnitude is given its own symbol, g. It is constant at any given
location on Earth and has the average value
Although g varies from 9.78 m/s2 to 9.83 m/s2, depending on latitude, altitude, underlying geological formations,
and local topography, let’s use an average value of 9.8 m/s2 rounded to two significant figures in this text unless
specified otherwise. Neglecting these effects on the value of g as a result of position on Earth’s surface, as well as
effects resulting from Earth’s rotation, we take the direction of acceleration due to gravity to be downward (toward
the center of Earth). In fact, its direction defines what we call vertical. Note that whether acceleration a in the
kinematic equations has the value +g or −g depends on how we define our coordinate system. If we define the
upward direction as positive, then and if we define the downward direction as positive, then
.
126 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
One-Dimensional Motion Involving Gravity
The best way to see the basic features of motion involving gravity is to start with the simplest situations and then
progress toward more complex ones. So, we start by considering straight up-and-down motion with no air
resistance or friction. These assumptions mean the velocity (if there is any) is vertical. If an object is dropped, we
know the initial velocity is zero when in free fall. When the object has left contact with whatever held or threw it, the
object is in free fall. When the object is thrown, it has the same initial speed in free fall as it did before it was
released. When the object comes in contact with the ground or any other object, it is no longer in free fall and its
acceleration of g is no longer valid. Under these circumstances, the motion is one-dimensional and has constant
acceleration of magnitude g. We represent vertical displacement with the symbol y.
KINEMATIC EQUATIONS FOR OBJECTS IN FREE FALL
We assume here that acceleration equals −g (with the positive direction upward).
3.15
3.16
3.17
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Free Fall
1. Decide on the sign of the acceleration of gravity. In Equation 3.15 through Equation 3.17, acceleration g is
negative, which says the positive direction is upward and the negative direction is downward. In some
problems, it may be useful to have acceleration g as positive, indicating the positive direction is downward.
2. 3. Draw a sketch of the problem. This helps visualize the physics involved.
Record the knowns and unknowns from the problem description. This helps devise a strategy for selecting the
appropriate equations to solve the problem.
4. Decide which of Equation 3.15 through Equation 3.17 are to be used to solve for the unknowns.
EXAMPLE 3.14
Free Fall of a Ball
Figure 3.27 shows the positions of a ball, at 1-s intervals, with an initial velocity of 4.9 m/s downward, that is thrown
from the top of a 98-m-high building. (a) How much time elapses before the ball reaches the ground? (b) What is the
velocity when it arrives at the ground?
Access for free at openstax.org
3.5 • Free Fall 127
FIGURE 3.27 The positions and velocities at 1-s intervals of a ball thrown downward from a tall building at 4.9 m/s.
Strategy
Choose the origin at the top of the building with the positive direction upward and the negative direction downward.
To find the time when the position is −98 m, we use Equation 3.16, with .
Solution
a. Substitute the given values into the equation:
This simplifies to
b. This is a quadratic equation with roots . The positive root is the one we are interested
in, since time is the time when the ball is released at the top of the building. (The time
represents the fact that a ball thrown upward from the ground would have been in the air for 5.0 s when it
passed by the top of the building moving downward at 4.9 m/s.)
Using Equation 3.15, we have
Significance
For situations when two roots are obtained from a quadratic equation in the time variable, we must look at the
physical significance of both roots to determine which is correct. Since corresponds to the time when the ball
was released, the negative root would correspond to a time before the ball was released, which is not physically
meaningful. When the ball hits the ground, its velocity is not immediately zero, but as soon as the ball interacts with
the ground, its acceleration is not g and it accelerates with a different value over a short time to zero velocity. This
problem shows how important it is to establish the correct coordinate system and to keep the signs of g in the
kinematic equations consistent.
EXAMPLE 3.15
Vertical Motion of a Baseball
A batter hits a baseball straight upward at home plate and the ball is caught 5.0 s after it is struck (Figure 3.28). (a)
What is the initial velocity of the ball? (b) What is the maximum height the ball reaches? (c) How long does it take to
reach the maximum height? (d) What is the acceleration at the top of its path? (e) What is the velocity of the ball
128 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
when it is caught? Assume the ball is hit and caught at the same location.
FIGURE 3.28 A baseball hit straight up is caught by the catcher 5.0 s later.
Strategy
ball is hit and caught.
Choose a coordinate system with a positive y-axis that is straight up and with an origin that is at the spot where the
Solution
a. Equation 3.16 gives
which gives .
b. At the maximum height, . With , Equation 3.17 gives
or
c. To find the time when , we use Equation 3.15:
d. e. This gives . Since the ball rises for 2.5 s, the time to fall is 2.5 s.
The acceleration is 9.8 m/s2 everywhere, even when the velocity is zero at the top of the path. Although the
velocity is zero at the top, it is changing at the rate of 9.8 m/s2 downward.
The velocity at can be determined with Equation 3.15:
Significance
The ball returns with the speed it had when it left. This is a general property of free fall for any initial velocity. We
used a single equation to go from throw to catch, and did not have to break the motion into two segments, upward
Access for free at openstax.org
3.5 • Free Fall 129
and downward. We are used to thinking that the effect of gravity is to create free fall downward toward Earth. It is
important to understand, as illustrated in this example, that objects moving upward away from Earth are also in a
state of free fall.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.7
A chunk of ice breaks off a glacier and falls 30.0 m before it hits the water. Assuming it falls freely (there is no air
resistance), how long does it take to hit the water? Which quantity increases faster, the speed of the ice chunk or its
distance traveled?
EXAMPLE 3.16
Rocket Booster
A small rocket with a booster blasts off and heads straight upward. When at a height of and velocity of 200.0
m/s, it releases its booster. (a) What is the maximum height the booster attains? (b) What is the velocity of the
booster at a height of 6.0 km? Neglect air resistance.
FIGURE 3.29 A rocket releases its booster at a given height and velocity. How high and how fast does the booster go?
Strategy
We need to select the coordinate system for the acceleration of gravity, which we take as negative downward. We
are given the initial velocity of the booster and its height. We consider the point of release as the origin. We know the
velocity is zero at the maximum position within the acceleration interval; thus, the velocity of the booster is zero at
its maximum height, so we can use this information as well. From these observations, we use Equation 3.17, which
gives us the maximum height of the booster. We also use Equation 3.17 to give the velocity at 6.0 km. The initial
velocity of the booster is 200.0 m/s.
130 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Solution
a. From Equation 3.17, . With , we can solve for y:
b. This solution gives the maximum height of the booster in our coordinate system, which has its origin at the
point of release, so the maximum height of the booster is roughly 7.0 km.
An altitude of 6.0 km corresponds to in the coordinate system we are using. The other initial
conditions are .
We have, from Equation 3.17,
Significance
We have both a positive and negative solution in (b). Since our coordinate system has the positive direction upward,
the +142.8 m/s corresponds to a positive upward velocity at 6000 m during the upward leg of the trajectory of the
booster. The value v = −142.8 m/s corresponds to the velocity at 6000 m on the downward leg. This example is also
important in that an object is given an initial velocity at the origin of our coordinate system, but the origin is at an
altitude above the surface of Earth, which must be taken into account when forming the solution.
INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation below to learn about graphing polynomials. The shape of the curve changes as the
constants are adjusted. View the curves for the individual terms (for example, y = b x) to see how they add to
generate the polynomial curve.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/3-5-free-fall)
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive the kinematic equations for constant acceleration using integral calculus.
• Use the integral formulation of the kinematic equations in analyzing motion.
• Find the functional form of velocity versus time given the acceleration function.
• Find the functional form of position versus time given the velocity function.
This section assumes you have enough background in calculus to be familiar with integration. In Instantaneous
Velocity and Speed and Average and Instantaneous Acceleration we introduced the kinematic functions of velocity
and acceleration using the derivative. By taking the derivative of the position function we found the velocity function,
and likewise by taking the derivative of the velocity function we found the acceleration function. Using integral
calculus, we can work backward and calculate the velocity function from the acceleration function, and the position
function from the velocity function.
Kinematic Equations from Integral Calculus
Let’s begin with a particle with an acceleration a(t) which is a known function of time. Since the time derivative of the
velocity function is acceleration,
we can take the indefinite integral of both sides, finding
Access for free at openstax.org
3.6 • Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration 131
where C 1 is a constant of integration. Since , the velocity is given by
3.18
Similarly, the time derivative of the position function is the velocity function,
Thus, we can use the same mathematical manipulations we just used and find
3.19
where C 2 is a second constant of integration.
We can derive the kinematic equations for a constant acceleration using these integrals. With a(t ) = a a constant,
and doing the integration in Equation 3.18, we find
If the initial velocity is v(0) = v0, then
Then, C 1 = v0 and
which is Equation 3.12. Substituting this expression into Equation 3.19 gives
Doing the integration, we find
If x(0) = x0, we have
so, C 2 = x0. Substituting back into the equation for x(t ), we finally have
which is Equation 3.13.
EXAMPLE 3.17
Motion of a Motorboat
A motorboat is traveling at a constant velocity of 5.0 m/s when it starts to accelerate opposite to the motion to arrive
at the dock. Its acceleration is . (a) What is the velocity function of the motorboat? (b) At what time
does the velocity reach zero? (c) What is the position function of the motorboat? (d) What is the displacement of the
motorboat from the time it begins to accelerate opposite to the motion to when the velocity is zero? (e) Graph the
velocity and position functions.
132 3 • Motion Along a Straight Line
Strategy
(a) To get the velocity function we must integrate and use initial conditions to find the constant of integration. (b) We
set the velocity function equal to zero and solve for t . (c) Similarly, we must integrate to find the position function
and use initial conditions to find the constant of integration. (d) Since the initial position is taken to be zero, we only
have to evaluate the position function at the time when the velocity is zero.
Solution
We take t= 0 to be the time when the boat starts to accelerate opposite to the motion.
a. From the functional form of the acceleration we can solve Equation 3.18 to get v(t ):
At t= 0 we have v(0) = 5.0 m/s = 0 + C 1, so C 1 = 5.0 m/s or .
b.
c. Solve Equation 3.19:
At t= 0, we set x(0) = 0 = x0, since we are only interested in the displacement from when the boat starts to
accelerate opposite to the motion. We have
Therefore, the equation for the position is
d. Since the initial position is taken to be zero, we only have to evaluate the position function at the time when
the velocity is zero. This occurs at t= 6.3 s. Therefore, the displacement is
FIGURE 3.30 (a) Velocity of the motorboat as a function of time. The motorboat decreases its velocity to zero in 6.3 s. At times greater than
this, velocity becomes negative—meaning, the boat is reversing direction. (b) Position of the motorboat as a function of time. At t= 6.3 s,
the velocity is zero and the boat has stopped. At times greater than this, the velocity becomes negative—meaning, if the boat continues to
move with the same acceleration, it reverses direction and heads back toward where it originated.
Access for free at openstax.org
3.6 • Finding Velocity and Displacement from Acceleration 133
Significance
The acceleration function is linear in time so the integration involves simple polynomials. In Figure 3.30, we see that
if we extend the solution beyond the point when the velocity is zero, the velocity becomes negative and the boat
reverses direction. This tells us that solutions can give us information outside our immediate interest and we should
be careful when interpreting them.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 3.8
A particle starts from rest and has an acceleration function function? (b) What is the position function? (c) When is the velocity zero?
. (a) What is the velocity
134 3 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
acceleration due to gravity acceleration of an object
as a result of gravity
average acceleration the rate of change in velocity;
the change in velocity over time
average speed the total distance traveled divided by
elapsed time
average velocity the displacement divided by the
time over which displacement occurs under
constant acceleration
displacement the change in position of an object
distance traveled the total length of the path
traveled between two positions
elapsed time the difference between the ending time
and the beginning time
free fall the state of movement that results from
gravitational force only
Key Equations
Displacement
Total displacement
Average velocity
Instantaneous velocity
Average speed
Instantaneous speed
Average acceleration
Instantaneous acceleration
Position from average velocity
Average velocity (for constant acceleration)
Velocity from acceleration
Position from velocity and acceleration
Velocity from distance
Velocity of free fall
Height of free fall
Velocity of free fall from height
Velocity from acceleration
Position from velocity
Summary
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity
• Kinematics is the description of motion without
considering its causes. In this chapter, it is
Access for free at openstax.org
instantaneous acceleration acceleration at a specific
point in time
instantaneous speed the absolute value of the
instantaneous velocity
instantaneous velocity the velocity at a specific
instant or time point
kinematics the description of motion through
properties such as position, time, velocity, and
acceleration
position the location of an object at a particular time
total displacement the sum of individual
displacements over a given time period
two-body pursuit problem a kinematics problem in
which the unknowns are calculated by solving the
kinematic equations simultaneously for two moving
objects
limited to motion along a straight line, called
one-dimensional motion.
• Displacement is the change in position of an
object. The SI unit for displacement is the meter.
Displacement has direction as well as magnitude.
• Distance traveled is the total length of the path
traveled between two positions.
• Time is measured in terms of change. The time
between two position points and is
. Elapsed time for an event is
, where is the final time and is
the initial time. The initial time is often taken to
be zero.
• Average velocity is defined as displacement
divided by elapsed time. If and are
two position time points, the average velocity
between these points is
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
• Instantaneous velocity is a continuous function
of time and gives the velocity at any point in time
during a particle’s motion. We can calculate the
instantaneous velocity at a specific time by
taking the derivative of the position function,
which gives us the functional form of
instantaneous velocity v(t ).
• Instantaneous velocity is a vector and can be
negative.
• Instantaneous speed is found by taking the
absolute value of instantaneous velocity, and it is
always positive.
• Average speed is total distance traveled divided
by elapsed time.
• The slope of a position-versus-time graph at a
specific time gives instantaneous velocity at that
time.
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
• Acceleration is the rate at which velocity
changes. The SI unit for acceleration is meters
per second squared.
• Acceleration is a vector. It has both magnitude
and direction and so can be the rate of change of
the magnitude or direction of the velocity, or
both.
Conceptual Questions
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity
Give an example in which there are clear
distinctions among distance traveled,
displacement, and magnitude of displacement.
Identify each quantity in your example
specifically.
Under what circumstances does distance
1. 2. 3 • Chapter Review 135
• Instantaneous acceleration a(t ) is a continuous
function of time and gives the acceleration at any
specific time during the motion. It is calculated
from the derivative of the velocity function.
Instantaneous acceleration is the slope of the
velocity-versus-time graph.
• Negative acceleration (sometimes called
deceleration) is acceleration in the negative
direction in the chosen coordinate system.
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
• When analyzing one-dimensional motion with
constant acceleration, identify the known
quantities and choose the appropriate equations
to solve for the unknowns. Either one or two of
the kinematic equations are needed to solve for
the unknowns, depending on the known and
unknown quantities.
• Two-body pursuit problems always require two
equations to be solved simultaneously for the
unknowns.
3.5 Free Fall
• An object in free fall experiences constant
acceleration if air resistance is negligible.
• On Earth, all free-falling objects have an
acceleration g due to gravity, which averages
.
• For objects in free fall, the upward direction is
normally taken as positive for displacement,
velocity, and acceleration.
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from
Acceleration
• Integral calculus gives us a more complete
formulation of kinematics.
• If acceleration a(t ) is known, we can use integral
calculus to derive expressions for velocity v(t )
and position x(t ).
• If acceleration is constant, the integral equations
reduce to Equation 3.12 and Equation 3.13 for
motion with constant acceleration.
3. traveled equal magnitude of displacement?
What is the only case in which magnitude of
displacement and distance are exactly the
same?
Bacteria move back and forth using their flagella
(structures that look like little tails). Speeds of
up to 50 μm/s (50 × 10−6 m/s) have been
observed. The total distance traveled by a
136 3 • Chapter Review
bacterium is large for its size, whereas its
displacement is small. Why is this?
4. Give an example of a device used to measure
time and identify what change in that device
indicates a change in time.
5. Does a car’s odometer measure distance
traveled or displacement?
6. During a given time interval the average velocity
of an object is zero. What can you conclude
about its displacement over the time interval?
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
7. There is a distinction between average speed
and the magnitude of average velocity. Give an
example that illustrates the difference between
these two quantities.
8. Does the speedometer of a car measure speed
or velocity?
9. If you divide the total distance traveled on a car
trip (as determined by the odometer) by the
elapsed time of the trip, are you calculating
average speed or magnitude of average velocity?
Under what circumstances are these two
quantities the same?
10. How are instantaneous velocity and
instantaneous speed related to one another?
How do they differ?
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
11. Is it possible for speed to be constant while
acceleration is not zero?
12. Is it possible for velocity to be constant while
acceleration is not zero? Explain.
13. Give an example in which velocity is zero yet
acceleration is not.
14. If a subway train is moving to the left (has a
negative velocity) and then comes to a stop,
what is the direction of its acceleration? Is the
acceleration positive or negative?
Plus and minus signs are used in one-
dimensional motion to indicate direction. What
is the sign of an acceleration that reduces the
magnitude of a negative velocity? Of a positive
velocity?
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
15. 16. When analyzing the motion of a single object,
Access for free at openstax.org
17. what is the required number of known physical
variables that are needed to solve for the
unknown quantities using the kinematic
equations?
State two scenarios of the kinematics of single
object where three known quantities require two
kinematic equations to solve for the unknowns.
3.5 Free Fall
18. 19. 20. What is the acceleration of a rock thrown
straight upward on the way up? At the top of its
flight? On the way down? Assume there is no air
resistance.
An object that is thrown straight up falls back to
Earth. This is one-dimensional motion. (a) When
is its velocity zero? (b) Does its velocity change
direction? (c) Does the acceleration have the
same sign on the way up as on the way down?
Suppose you throw a rock nearly straight up at a
coconut in a palm tree and the rock just misses
the coconut on the way up but hits the coconut
on the way down. Neglecting air resistance and
the slight horizontal variation in motion to
account for the hit and miss of the coconut, how
does the speed of the rock when it hits the
coconut on the way down compare with what it
would have been if it had hit the coconut on the
way up? Is it more likely to dislodge the coconut
on the way up or down? Explain.
The severity of a fall depends on your speed
when you strike the ground. All factors but the
acceleration from gravity being the same, how
many times higher could a safe fall occur on the
Moon than on Earth (gravitational acceleration
on the Moon is about one-sixth that of the
Earth)?
How many times higher could an astronaut jump
on the Moon than on Earth if her takeoff speed is
the same in both locations (gravitational
acceleration on the Moon is about on-sixth of
that on Earth)?
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from
Acceleration
21. 22. 23. When given the acceleration function, what
additional information is needed to find the
velocity function and position function?
24. 25. 26. 27. Problems
3.1 Position, Displacement, and Average Velocity
Consider a coordinate system in which the
positive x axis is directed upward vertically.
What are the positions of a particle (a) 5.0 m
directly above the origin and (b) 2.0 m below the
origin?
A car is 2.0 km west of a traffic light at t= 0 and
5.0 km east of the light at t= 6.0 min. Assume
the origin of the coordinate system is the light
and the positive x direction is eastward. (a) What
are the car’s position vectors at these two
times? (b) What is the car’s displacement
between 0 min and 6.0 min?
The Shanghai maglev train connects Longyang
Road to Pudong International Airport, a distance
of 30 km. The journey takes 8 minutes on
average. What is the maglev train’s average
velocity?
The position of a particle moving along the
x-axis is given by m. (a) At
what time does the particle cross the origin? (b)
What is the displacement of the particle
between and
A cyclist rides 8.0 km east for 20 minutes, then
they turn and head west for 8 minutes and 3.2
km. Finally, they ride east for 16 km, which takes
40 minutes. (a) What is the final displacement of
the cyclist? (b) What is their average velocity?
On February 15, 2013, a superbolide meteor
(brighter than the Sun) entered Earth’s
atmosphere over Chelyabinsk, Russia, and
exploded at an altitude of 23.5 km.
Eyewitnesses could feel the intense heat from
the fireball, and the blast wave from the
explosion blew out windows in buildings. The
blast wave took approximately 2 minutes 30
seconds to reach ground level. The blast wave
traveled at 10° above the horizon. (a) What was
the average velocity of the blast wave? b)
Compare this with the speed of sound, which is
343 m/s at sea level.
3.2 Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
30. A woodchuck runs 20 m to the right in 5 s, then
turns and runs 10 m to the left in 3 s. (a) What is
the average velocity of the woodchuck? (b) What
is its average speed?
Sketch the velocity-versus-time graph from the
28. 29. 31. 32. 33. 34. 3 • Chapter Review 137
following position-versus-time graph.
Sketch the velocity-versus-time graph from the
following position-versus-time graph.
Given the following velocity-versus-time graph,
sketch the position-versus-time graph.
An object has a position function x(t ) = 5tm. (a)
What is the velocity as a function of time? (b)
Graph the position function and the velocity
function.
138 3 • Chapter Review
35. 36. A particle moves along the x-axis according to
. (a) What is the
instantaneous velocity at t= 2 s and t= 3 s? (b)
What is the instantaneous speed at these times?
(c) What is the average velocity between t= 2 s
and t= 3 s?
Unreasonable results. A particle moves along
the x-axis according to . At
what time is the velocity of the particle equal to
zero? Is this reasonable?
3.3 Average and Instantaneous Acceleration
37. A cheetah can accelerate from rest to a speed of
30.0 m/s in 7.00 s. What is its acceleration?
38. Dr. John Paul Stapp was a U.S. Air Force officer
who studied the effects of extreme acceleration
on the human body. On December 10, 1954,
Stapp rode a rocket sled, accelerating from rest
to a top speed of 282 m/s (1015 km/h) in 5.00 s
and was brought jarringly back to rest in only
1.40 s. Calculate his (a) acceleration in his
direction of motion and (b) acceleration opposite
to his direction of motion. Express each in
multiples of g (9.80 m/s2) by taking its ratio to
the acceleration of gravity.
Sketch the acceleration-versus-time graph from
the following velocity-versus-time graph.
39. 40. 41. A commuter backs her car out of her garage with
an acceleration of 1.40 m/s2. (a) How long does
it take her to reach a speed of 2.00 m/s? (b) If
she then brakes to a stop in 0.800 s, what is her
acceleration?
Assume an intercontinental ballistic missile goes
Access for free at openstax.org
42. from rest to a suborbital speed of 6.50 km/s in
60.0 s (the actual speed and time are classified).
What is its average acceleration in meters per
second squared and in multiples of g (9.80
m/s2)?
An airplane, starting from rest, moves down the
runway at constant acceleration for 18 s and
then takes off at a speed of 60 m/s. What is the
average acceleration of the plane?
3.4 Motion with Constant Acceleration
43. 44. 45. 46. A particle moves in a straight line at a constant
velocity of 30 m/s. What is its displacement
between t = 0 and t = 5.0 s?
A particle moves in a straight line with an initial
velocity of 0 m/s and a constant acceleration of
30 m/s2. If , what is the particle’s
position at t= 5 s?
A particle moves in a straight line with an initial
velocity of 30 m/s and constant acceleration 30
m/s2. (a) What is its displacement at t= 5 s? (b)
What is its velocity at this same time?
(a) Sketch a graph of velocity versus time
corresponding to the graph of displacement versus
time given in the following figure. (b) Identify the
time or times (t a, t b, t c, etc.) at which the
instantaneous velocity has the greatest positive
value. (c) At which times is it zero? (d) At which
times is it negative?
47. (a) Sketch a graph of acceleration versus time
corresponding to the graph of velocity versus time
given in the following figure. (b) Identify the time or
times (t a, t b, t c, etc.) at which the acceleration has
the greatest positive value. (c) At which times is it
zero? (d) At which times is it negative?
48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. A particle has a constant acceleration of 6.0
m/s2. (a) If its initial velocity is 2.0 m/s, at what
time is its displacement 5.0 m? (b) What is its
velocity at that time?
At t= 10 s, a particle is moving from left to right
with a speed of 5.0 m/s. At t= 20 s, the particle
is moving right to left with a speed of 8.0 m/s.
Assuming the particle’s acceleration is constant,
determine (a) its acceleration, (b) its initial
velocity, and (c) the instant when its velocity is
zero.
A well-thrown ball is caught in a well-padded
mitt. If the acceleration of the ball
is , and 1.85 ms
elapses from the time the ball
first touches the mitt until it stops, what is the
initial velocity of the ball?
A bullet in a gun is accelerated from the firing
chamber to the end of the barrel at an average
rate of for .
What is its muzzle velocity (that is, its final
velocity)?
(a) A light-rail commuter train accelerates at a
rate of 1.35 m/s2. How long does it take to reach
its top speed of 80.0 km/h, starting from rest?
(b) The same train ordinarily accelerates
opposite to the motion at a rate of 1.65 m/s2
.
How long does it take to come to a stop from its
top speed? (c) In emergencies, the train can
accelerate opposite to the motion more rapidly,
coming to rest from 80.0 km/h in 8.30 s. What is
its emergency acceleration in meters per second
squared?
While entering a freeway, a car accelerates from
rest at a rate of 2.40 m/s2 for 12.0 s. (a) Draw a
sketch of the situation. (b) List the knowns in
this problem. (c) How far does the car travel in
those 12.0 s? To solve this part, first identify the
unknown, then indicate how you chose the
54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 3 • Chapter Review 139
appropriate equation to solve for it. After
choosing the equation, show your steps in
solving for the unknown, check your units, and
discuss whether the answer is reasonable. (d)
What is the car’s final velocity? Solve for this
unknown in the same manner as in (c), showing
all steps explicitly.
Unreasonable results At the end of a race, a
runner accelerates opposite to the motion from
a velocity of 9.00 m/s at a rate of 2.00 m/s2. (a)
How far does she travel in the next 5.00 s? (b)
What is her final velocity? (c) Evaluate the result.
Does it make sense?
Blood is accelerated from rest to 30.0 cm/s in a
distance of 1.80 cm by the left ventricle of the
heart. (a) Make a sketch of the situation. (b) List
the knowns in this problem. (c) How long does
the acceleration take? To solve this part, first
identify the unknown, then discuss how you
chose the appropriate equation to solve for it.
After choosing the equation, show your steps in
solving for the unknown, checking your units. (d)
Is the answer reasonable when compared with
the time for a heartbeat?
During a slap shot, a hockey player accelerates
the puck from a velocity of 8.00 m/s to 40.0 m/s
in the same direction. If this shot takes
, what is the distance over which
the puck accelerates?
A powerful motorcycle can accelerate from rest
to 26.8 m/s (100 km/h) in only 3.90 s. (a) What
is its average acceleration? (b) Assuming
constant acceleration, how far does it travel in
that time?
Freight trains can produce only relatively small
accelerations. (a) What is the final velocity of a
freight train that accelerates at a rate of
for 8.00 min, starting with an initial
velocity of 4.00 m/s? (b) If the train can slow
down at a rate of , how long will it
take to come to a stop from this velocity? (c)
How far will it travel in each case?
A fireworks shell is accelerated from rest to a
velocity of 65.0 m/s over a distance of 0.250 m.
(a) Calculate the acceleration. (b) How long did
the acceleration last?
A swan on a lake gets airborne by flapping its
wings and running on top of the water. (a) If the
swan must reach a velocity of 6.00 m/s to take
off and it accelerates from rest at an average
140 3 • Chapter Review
61. 62. 63. 64. 65. rate of , how far will it travel before
becoming airborne? (b) How long does this take?
A woodpecker’s brain is specially protected from
large accelerations by tendon-like attachments
inside the skull. While pecking on a tree, the
woodpecker’s head comes to a stop from an
initial velocity of 0.600 m/s in a distance of only
2.00 mm. (a) Find the acceleration in meters per
second squared and in multiples of g, where g =
9.80 m/s2. (b) Calculate the stopping time. (c)
The tendons cradling the brain stretch, making
its stopping distance 4.50 mm (greater than the
head and, hence, less acceleration of the brain).
What is the brain’s acceleration, expressed in
multiples of g?
An unwary football player collides with a padded
goalpost while running at a velocity of 7.50 m/s
and comes to a full stop after compressing the
padding and his body 0.350 m. (a) What is his
acceleration? (b) How long does the collision
last?
A care package is dropped out of a cargo plane
and lands in the forest. If we assume the care
package speed on impact is 54 m/s (123 mph),
then what is its acceleration? Assume the trees
and snow stops it over a distance of 3.0 m.
An express train passes through a station. It
enters with an initial velocity of 22.0 m/s and
accelerates opposite to the motion at a rate of
as it goes through. The station is
210.0 m long. (a) How fast is it going when the
nose leaves the station? (b) How long is the nose
of the train in the station? (c) If the train is 130
m long, what is the velocity of the end of the
train as it leaves? (d) When does the end of the
train leave the station?
Unreasonable results Dragsters can actually
reach a top speed of 145.0 m/s in only 4.45 s.
(a) Calculate the average acceleration for such a
dragster. (b) Find the final velocity of this
dragster starting from rest and accelerating at
the rate found in (a) for 402.0 m (a quarter mile)
without using any information on time. (c) Why is
the final velocity greater than that used to find
the average acceleration? (Hint : Consider
whether the assumption of constant
acceleration is valid for a dragster. If not, discuss
whether the acceleration would be greater at the
beginning or end of the run and what effect that
would have on the final velocity.)
3.5 Free Fall
66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 71. Calculate the displacement and velocity at times
of (a) 0.500 s, (b) 1.00 s, (c) 1.50 s, and (d) 2.00
s for a ball thrown straight up with an initial
velocity of 15.0 m/s. Take the point of release to
be .
Calculate the displacement and velocity at times
of (a) 0.500 s, (b) 1.00 s, (c) 1.50 s, (d) 2.00 s,
and (e) 2.50 s for a rock thrown straight down
with an initial velocity of 14.0 m/s from the
Verrazano Narrows Bridge in New York City. The
roadway of this bridge is 70.0 m above the
water.
A basketball referee tosses the ball straight up
for the starting tip-off. At what velocity must a
basketball player leave the ground to rise 1.25
m above the floor in an attempt to get the ball?
A rescue helicopter is hovering over a person
whose boat has sunk. One of the rescuers
throws a life preserver straight down to the
victim with an initial velocity of 1.40 m/s and
observes that it takes 1.8 s to reach the water.
(a) List the knowns in this problem. (b) How high
above the water was the preserver released?
Note that the downdraft of the helicopter
reduces the effects of air resistance on the
falling life preserver, so that an acceleration
equal to that of gravity is reasonable.
Unreasonable results A dolphin in an aquatic
show jumps straight up out of the water at a
velocity of 15.0 m/s. (a) List the knowns in this
problem. (b) How high does his body rise above
the water? To solve this part, first note that the
final velocity is now a known, and identify its
value. Then, identify the unknown and discuss
how you chose the appropriate equation to solve
for it. After choosing the equation, show your
steps in solving for the unknown, checking units,
and discuss whether the answer is reasonable.
(c) How long a time is the dolphin in the air?
Neglect any effects resulting from his size or
orientation.
A diver bounces straight up from a diving board,
avoiding the diving board on the way down, and
falls feet first into a pool. She starts with a
velocity of 4.00 m/s and her takeoff point is 1.80
m above the pool. (a) What is her highest point
above the board? (b) How long a time are her
feet in the air? (c) What is her velocity when her
feet hit the water?
Access for free at openstax.org
72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. (a) Calculate the height of a cliff if it takes 2.35 s
for a rock to hit the ground when it is thrown
straight up from the cliff with an initial velocity of
8.00 m/s. (b) How long a time would it take to
reach the ground if it is thrown straight down
with the same speed?
A very strong, but inept, shot putter puts the
shot straight up vertically with an initial velocity
of 11.0 m/s. How long a time does he have to get
out of the way if the shot was released at a
height of 2.20 m and he is 1.80 m tall?
You throw a ball straight up with an initial
velocity of 15.0 m/s. It passes a tree branch on
the way up at a height of 7.0 m. How much
additional time elapses before the ball passes
the tree branch on the way back down?
A kangaroo can jump over an object 2.50 m high.
(a) Considering just its vertical motion, calculate
its vertical speed when it leaves the ground. (b)
How long a time is it in the air?
Standing at the base of one of the cliffs of Mt.
Arapiles in Victoria, Australia, a hiker hears a
rock break loose from a height of 105.0 m. He
can’t see the rock right away, but then does,
1.50 s later. (a) How far above the hiker is the
rock when he can see it? (b) How much time
does he have to move before the rock hits his
head?
There is a 250-m-high cliff at Half Dome in
Yosemite National Park in California. Suppose a
boulder breaks loose from the top of this cliff. (a)
How fast will it be going when it strikes the
ground? (b) Assuming a reaction time of 0.300 s,
how long a time will a tourist at the bottom have
to get out of the way after hearing the sound of
the rock breaking loose (neglecting the height of
Additional Problems
82. Professional baseball player Nolan Ryan could
pitch a baseball at approximately 160.0 km/h. At
that average velocity, how long did it take a ball
thrown by Ryan to reach home plate, which is
18.4 m from the pitcher’s mound? Compare this
with the average reaction time of a human to a
visual stimulus, which is 0.25 s.
83. An airplane leaves Chicago and makes the
3000-km trip to Los Angeles in 5.0 h. A second
plane leaves Chicago one-half hour later and
arrives in Los Angeles at the same time.
Compare the average velocities of the two
3 • Chapter Review 141
78. 79. the tourist, which would become negligible
anyway if hit)? The speed of sound is 335.0 m/s
on this day.
3.6 Finding Velocity and Displacement from
Acceleration
The acceleration of a particle varies with time
according to the equation .
Initially, the velocity and position are zero. (a)
What is the velocity as a function of time? (b)
What is the position as a function of time?
Between t= 0 and t= t 0, a rocket moves straight
upward with an acceleration given by
, where Aand Bare constants.
(a) If x is in meters and tis in seconds, what are
the units of Aand B ? (b) If the rocket starts from
rest, how does the velocity vary between t= 0
and t= t 0? (c) If its initial position is zero, what is
the rocket’s position as a function of time during
this same time interval?
The velocity of a particle moving along the x-axis
varies with time according to ,
where A= 2 m/s, B= 0.25 m, and
. Determine the acceleration
and position of the particle at t= 2.0 s and t=
5.0 s. Assume that .
A particle at rest leaves the origin with its
velocity increasing with time according to v(t ) =
3.2tm/s. At 5.0 s, the particle’s velocity starts
decreasing according to [16.0 – 1.5(t– 5.0)] m/
s. This decrease continues until t= 11.0 s, after
which the particle’s velocity remains constant at
7.0 m/s. (a) What is the acceleration of the
particle as a function of time? (b) What is the
position of the particle at t= 2.0 s, t= 7.0 s, and
t= 12.0 s?
80. 81. planes. Ignore the curvature of Earth and the
difference in altitude between the two cities.
84. Unreasonable Results A cyclist rides 16.0 km
east, then 8.0 km west, then 8.0 km east, then
32.0 km west, and finally 11.2 km east. If his
average velocity is 24 km/h, how long did it take
him to complete the trip? Is this a reasonable
time?
85. An object has an acceleration of . At
, its velocity is . Determine
the object’s velocities at and .
142 3 • Chapter Review
86. 87. 88. A particle moves along the x-axis according to
the equation m. What are the
velocity and acceleration at s and
s?
A particle moving at constant acceleration has
velocities of at s and at
s. What is the acceleration of the
particle?
A train is moving up a steep grade at constant
velocity (see following figure) when its caboose
breaks loose and starts rolling freely along the track.
After 5.0 s, the caboose is 30 m behind the train.
What is the acceleration of the caboose?
89. 90. 91. 92. An electron is moving in a straight line with a
velocity of m/s. It enters a region 5.0
cm long where it undergoes an acceleration of
along the same straight line.
(a) What is the electron’s velocity when it
emerges from this region? b) How long does the
electron take to cross the region?
An ambulance driver is rushing a patient to the
hospital. While traveling at 72 km/h, she notices
the traffic light at the upcoming intersections
has turned amber. To reach the intersection
before the light turns red, she must travel 50 m
in 2.0 s. (a) What minimum acceleration must
the ambulance have to reach the intersection
before the light turns red? (b) What is the speed
of the ambulance when it reaches the
intersection?
A motorcycle that is slowing down uniformly
covers 2.0 successive km in 80 s and 120 s,
respectively. Calculate (a) the acceleration of the
motorcycle and (b) its velocity at the beginning
and end of the 2-km trip.
A cyclist travels from point A to point B in 10
min. During the first 2.0 min of her trip, she
maintains a uniform acceleration of .
She then travels at constant velocity for the next
5.0 min. Next, she accelerates opposite to the
motion at a constant rate so that she comes to a
Access for free at openstax.org
93. 94. rest at point B 3.0 min later. (a) Sketch the
velocity-versus-time graph for the trip. (b) What
is the acceleration during the last 3 min? (c) How
far does the cyclist travel?
Two trains are moving at 30 m/s in opposite
directions on the same track. The engineers see
simultaneously that they are on a collision
course and apply the brakes when they are 1000
m apart. Assuming both trains have the same
acceleration, what must this acceleration be if
the trains are to stop just short of colliding?
A 10.0-m-long truck moving with a constant velocity
of 97.0 km/h passes a 3.0-m-long car moving with a
constant velocity of 80.0 km/h. How much time
elapses between the moment the front of the truck
is even with the back of the car and the moment the
back of the truck is even with the front of the car?
95. 96. A police car waits in hiding slightly off the
highway. A speeding car is spotted by the police
car doing 40 m/s. At the instant the speeding car
passes the police car, the police car accelerates
from rest at 4 m/s2 to catch the speeding car.
How long does it take the police car to catch the
speeding car?
Pablo is running in a half marathon at a velocity
of 3 m/s. Another runner, Jacob, is 50 meters
behind Pablo with the same velocity. Jacob
begins to accelerate at 0.05 m/s2. (a) How long
97. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104. does it take Jacob to catch Pablo? (b) What is
the distance covered by Jacob? (c) What is the
final velocity of Jacob?
Unreasonable results A runner approaches the
finish line and is 75 m away; her speed at this
position is 8 m/s. She accelerates opposite to
the motion at this point at 0.5 m/s2. How long
does it take her to cross the finish line from 75 m
away? Is this reasonable?
An airplane accelerates at 5.00 m/s2 for 30.0 s.
During this time, it covers a distance of 10.0 km.
What are the initial and final velocities of the
airplane?
Compare the distance traveled of an object that
undergoes a change in velocity that is twice its
initial velocity with an object that changes its
velocity by four times its initial velocity over the
same time period. The accelerations of both
objects are constant.
An object is moving east with a constant velocity
and is at position . (a) With
what acceleration must the object have for its
total displacement to be zero at a later time t?
(b) What is the physical interpretation of the
solution in the case for ∞?
A ball is thrown straight up. It passes a 2.00-m-
high window 7.50 m off the ground on its path
up and takes 1.30 s to go past the window. What
was the ball’s initial velocity?
A coin is dropped from a hot-air balloon that is
300 m above the ground and rising at 10.0 m/s
upward. For the coin, find (a) the maximum
height reached, (b) its position and velocity 4.00
s after being released, and (c) the time before it
hits the ground.
A soft tennis ball is dropped onto a hard floor
from a height of 1.50 m and rebounds to a height
of 1.10 m. (a) Calculate its velocity just before it
strikes the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just
after it leaves the floor on its way back up. (c)
Calculate its acceleration during contact with the
floor if that contact lasts 3.50 ms
(d) How much did the ball
compress during its collision with the floor,
assuming the floor is absolutely rigid?
Unreasonable results. A raindrop falls from a
cloud 100 m above the ground. Neglect air
resistance. What is the speed of the raindrop
when it hits the ground? Is this a reasonable
105. 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. 111. 3 • Chapter Review 143
number?
Compare the time in the air of a basketball
player who jumps 1.0 m vertically off the floor
with that of a player who jumps 0.3 m vertically.
Suppose that a person takes 0.5 s to react and
move his hand to catch an object he has
dropped. (a) How far does the object fall on
Earth, where (b) How far does the
object fall on the Moon, where the acceleration
due to gravity is 1/6 of that on Earth?
A hot-air balloon rises from ground level at a
constant velocity of 3.0 m/s. One minute after
liftoff, a sandbag is dropped accidentally from
the balloon. Calculate (a) the time it takes for the
sandbag to reach the ground and (b) the velocity
of the sandbag when it hits the ground.
(a) A world record was set for the men’s 100-m
dash in the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing by
Usain Bolt of Jamaica. Bolt “coasted” across the
finish line with a time of 9.69 s. If we assume
that Bolt accelerated for 3.00 s to reach his
maximum speed, and maintained that speed for
the rest of the race, calculate his maximum
speed and his acceleration. (b) During the same
Olympics, Bolt also set the world record in the
200-m dash with a time of 19.30 s. Using the
same assumptions as for the 100-m dash, what
was his maximum speed for this race?
An object is dropped from a height of 75.0 m
above ground level. (a) Determine the distance
traveled during the first second. (b) Determine
the final velocity at which the object hits the
ground. (c) Determine the distance traveled
during the last second of motion before hitting
the ground.
A steel ball is dropped onto a hard floor from a
height of 1.50 m and rebounds to a height of
1.45 m. (a) Calculate its velocity just before it
strikes the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just
after it leaves the floor on its way back up. (c)
Calculate its acceleration during contact with the
floor if that contact lasts 0.0800 ms
(d) How much did the ball
compress during its collision with the floor,
assuming the floor is absolutely rigid?
An object is dropped from a roof of a building of
height h . During the last second of its descent, it
drops a distance h /3. Calculate the height of the
building.
144 3 • Chapter Review
Challenge Problems
112. 113. 114. In a 100-m race, the winner is timed at 11.2 s.
The second-place finisher’s time is 11.6 s. How
far is the second-place finisher behind the
winner when she crosses the finish line? Assume
the velocity of each runner is constant
throughout the race.
The position of a particle moving along the
x-axis varies with time according to
m. Find (a) the velocity and
acceleration of the particle as functions of time,
(b) the velocity and acceleration at t= 2.0 s, (c)
the time at which the position is a maximum, (d)
the time at which the velocity is zero, and (e) the
maximum position.
A cyclist sprints at the end of a race to clinch a
victory. She has an initial velocity of 11.5 m/s
and accelerates at a rate of 0.500 m/s2 for 7.00
s. (a) What is her final velocity? (b) The cyclist
continues at this velocity to the finish line. If she
115. is 300 m from the finish line when she starts to
accelerate, how much time did she save? (c) The
second-place winner was 5.00 m ahead when
the winner started to accelerate, but he was
unable to accelerate, and traveled at 11.8 m/s
until the finish line. What was the difference in
finish time in seconds between the winner and
runner-up? How far back was the runner-up
when the winner crossed the finish line?
In 1967, New Zealander Burt Munro set the
world record for an Indian motorcycle, on the
Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, of 295.38 km/h.
The one-way course was 8.00 km long.
Acceleration rates are often described by the
time it takes to reach 96.0 km/h from rest. If this
time was 4.00 s and Burt accelerated at this rate
until he reached his maximum speed, how long
did it take Burt to complete the course?
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 4
Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.1 The Red Arrows is the aerobatics display team of Britain’s Royal Air Force. Based in Lincolnshire, England, they perform
precision flying shows at high speeds, which requires accurate measurement of position, velocity, and acceleration in three dimensions.
(credit: modification of work by Phil Long)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
4.2 Acceleration Vector
4.3 Projectile Motion
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
INTRODUCTION
To give a complete description of kinematics, we must explore motion in two and three
dimensions. After all, most objects in our universe do not move in straight lines; rather, they follow curved paths.
From kicked footballs to the flight paths of birds to the orbital motions of celestial bodies and down to the flow of
blood plasma in your veins, most motion follows curved trajectories.
Fortunately, the treatment of motion in one dimension in the previous chapter has given us a foundation on which to
build, as the concepts of position, displacement, velocity, and acceleration defined in one dimension can be
expanded to two and three dimensions. Consider the Red Arrows, also known as the Royal Air Force Aerobatic team
of the United Kingdom. Each jet follows a unique curved trajectory in three-dimensional airspace, as well as has a
unique velocity and acceleration. Thus, to describe the motion of any of the jets accurately, we must assign to each
jet a unique position vector in three dimensions as well as a unique velocity and acceleration vector. We can apply
the same basic equations for displacement, velocity, and acceleration we derived in Motion Along a Straight Line to
describe the motion of the jets in two and three dimensions, but with some modifications—in particular, the
inclusion of vectors.
In this chapter we also explore two special types of motion in two dimensions: projectile motion and circular
motion. Last, we conclude with a discussion of relative motion. In the chapter-opening picture, each jet has a
relative motion with respect to any other jet in the group or to the people observing the air show on the ground.
146 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate position vectors in a multidimensional displacement problem.
• Solve for the displacement in two or three dimensions.
• Calculate the velocity vector given the position vector as a function of time.
• Calculate the average velocity in multiple dimensions.
Displacement and velocity in two or three dimensions are straightforward extensions of the one-dimensional
definitions. However, now they are vector quantities, so calculations with them have to follow the rules of vector
algebra, not scalar algebra.
Displacement Vector
To describe motion in two and three dimensions, we must first establish a coordinate system and a convention for
the axes. We generally use the coordinates x, y, and z to locate a particle at point P (x, y, z) in three dimensions. If the
particle is moving, the variables x, y, and z are functions of time (t ):
4.1
The position vector from the origin of the coordinate system to point Pis Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector, is
In unit vector notation, introduced in
4.2
Figure 4.2 shows the coordinate system and the vector to point P , where a particle could be located at a particular
time t . Note the orientation of the x, y, and z axes. This orientation is called a right-handed coordinate system
(Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector) and it is used throughout the chapter.
FIGURE 4.2 A three-dimensional coordinate system with a particle at position P (x(t ), y(t ), z(t )).
With our definition of the position of a particle in three-dimensional space, we can formulate the three-dimensional
displacement. Figure 4.3 shows a particle at time located at with position vector At a later time the
particle is located at with position vector . The displacement vector is found by subtracting from
4.3
Vector addition is discussed in Vectors. Note that this is the same operation we did in one dimension, but now the
vectors are in three-dimensional space.
Access for free at openstax.org
4.1 • Displacement and Velocity Vectors 147
FIGURE 4.3 The displacement is the vector from to .
The following examples illustrate the concept of displacement in multiple dimensions.
EXAMPLE 4.1
Polar Orbiting Satellite
A satellite is in a circular polar orbit around Earth at an altitude of 400 km—meaning, it passes directly overhead at
the North and South Poles. What is the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector from when it is directly
over the North Pole to when it is at latitude?
Strategy
We make a picture of the problem to visualize the solution graphically. This will aid in our understanding of the
displacement. We then use unit vectors to solve for the displacement.
Solution
Figure 4.4 shows the surface of Earth and a circle that represents the orbit of the satellite. Although satellites are
moving in three-dimensional space, they follow trajectories of ellipses, which can be graphed in two dimensions.
The position vectors are drawn from the center of Earth, which we take to be the origin of the coordinate system,
with the y-axis as north and the x-axis as east. The vector between them is the displacement of the satellite. We
take the radius of Earth as 6370 km, so the length of each position vector is 6770 km.
148 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.4 Two position vectors are drawn from the center of Earth, which is the origin of the coordinate system, with the y-axis as north
and the x-axis as east. The vector between them is the displacement of the satellite.
In unit vector notation, the position vectors are
Evaluating the sine and cosine, we have
Now we can find , the displacement of the satellite:
The angle the displacement
The magnitude of the displacement is makes with the x-axis is
Significance
Plotting the displacement gives information and meaning to the unit vector solution to the problem. When plotting
the displacement, we need to include its components as well as its magnitude and the angle it makes with a chosen
axis—in this case, the x-axis (Figure 4.5).
Access for free at openstax.org
4.1 • Displacement and Velocity Vectors 149
FIGURE 4.5 Displacement vector with components, angle, and magnitude.
Note that the satellite took a curved path along its circular orbit to get from its initial position to its final position in
this example. It also could have traveled 4787 km east, then 11,557 km south to arrive at the same location. Both of
these paths are longer than the length of the displacement vector. In fact, the displacement vector gives the
shortest path between two points in one, two, or three dimensions.
Many applications in physics can have a series of displacements, as discussed in the previous chapter. The total
displacement is the sum of the individual displacements, only this time, we need to be careful, because we are
adding vectors. We illustrate this concept with an example of Brownian motion.
EXAMPLE 4.2
Brownian Motion
Brownian motion is a chaotic random motion of particles suspended in a fluid, resulting from collisions with the
molecules of the fluid. This motion is three-dimensional. The displacements in numerical order of a particle
undergoing Brownian motion could look like the following, in micrometers (Figure 4.6):
What is the total displacement of the particle from the origin?
150 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.6 Trajectory of a particle undergoing random displacements of Brownian motion. The total displacement is shown in red.
Solution
We form the sum of the displacements and add them as vectors:
To complete the solution, we express the displacement as a magnitude and direction,
with respect to the x-axis in the xz-plane.
Significance
From the figure we can see the magnitude of the total displacement is less than the sum of the magnitudes of the
individual displacements.
Velocity Vector
In the previous chapter we found the instantaneous velocity by calculating the derivative of the position function
with respect to time. We can do the same operation in two and three dimensions, but we use vectors. The
instantaneous velocity vector is now
4.4
Let’s look at the relative orientation of the position vector and velocity vector graphically. In Figure 4.7 we show the
vectors and which give the position of a particle moving along a path represented by the gray line. As
goes to zero, the velocity vector, given by Equation 4.4, becomes tangent to the path of the particle at time t .
Access for free at openstax.org
4.1 • Displacement and Velocity Vectors 151
FIGURE 4.7 A particle moves along a path given by the gray line. In the limit as the path of the particle.
Equation 4.4 can also be written in terms of the components of approaches zero, the velocity vector becomes tangent to
Since
we can write
4.5
where
4.6
If only the average velocity is of concern, we have the vector equivalent of the one-dimensional average velocity for
two and three dimensions:
4.7
EXAMPLE 4.3
Calculating the Velocity Vector
The position function of a particle is and speed at t= 2.0 s? (b) What is the average velocity between 1.0 s and 3.0 s?
(a) What is the instantaneous velocity
Solution
Using Equation 4.5 and Equation 4.6, and taking the derivative of the position function with respect to time, we find
(a)
Speed
(b) From Equation 4.7,
Significance
We see the average velocity is the same as the instantaneous velocity at t= 2.0 s, as a result of the velocity function
152 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
being linear. This need not be the case in general. In fact, most of the time, instantaneous and average velocities are
not the same.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.1
The position function of a particle is average velocity between 2 s and 4 s equal to the instantaneous velocity at t= 3 s?
(a) What is the instantaneous velocity at t= 3 s? (b) Is the
The Independence of Perpendicular Motions
When we look at the three-dimensional equations for position and velocity written in unit vector notation, Equation
4.2 and Equation 4.5, we see the components of these equations are separate and unique functions of time that do
not depend on one another. Motion along the x direction has no part of its motion along the y and z directions, and
similarly for the other two coordinate axes. Thus, the motion of an object in two or three dimensions can be divided
into separate, independent motions along the perpendicular axes of the coordinate system in which the motion
takes place.
To illustrate this concept with respect to displacement, consider a woman walking from point Ato point Bin a city
with square blocks. The woman taking the path from Ato Bmay walk east for so many blocks and then north (two
perpendicular directions) for another set of blocks to arrive at B . How far she walks east is affected only by her
motion eastward. Similarly, how far she walks north is affected only by her motion northward.
INDEPENDENCE OF MOTION
In the kinematic description of motion, we are able to treat the horizontal and vertical components of motion
separately. In many cases, motion in the horizontal direction does not affect motion in the vertical direction, and
vice versa.
An example illustrating the independence of vertical and horizontal motions is given by two baseballs. One baseball
is dropped from rest. At the same instant, another is thrown horizontally from the same height and it follows a
curved path. A stroboscope captures the positions of the balls at fixed time intervals as they fall (Figure 4.8).
Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 • Acceleration Vector 153
FIGURE 4.8 A diagram of the motions of two identical balls: one falls from rest and the other has an initial horizontal velocity. Each
subsequent position is an equal time interval. Arrows represent the horizontal and vertical velocities at each position. The ball on the right
has an initial horizontal velocity whereas the ball on the left has no horizontal velocity. Despite the difference in horizontal velocities, the
vertical velocities and positions are identical for both balls, which shows the vertical and horizontal motions are independent.
It is remarkable that for each flash of the strobe, the vertical positions of the two balls are the same. This similarity
implies vertical motion is independent of whether the ball is moving horizontally. (Assuming no air resistance, the
vertical motion of a falling object is influenced by gravity only, not by any horizontal forces.) Careful examination of
the ball thrown horizontally shows it travels the same horizontal distance between flashes. This is because there are
no additional forces on the ball in the horizontal direction after it is thrown. This result means horizontal velocity is
constant and is affected neither by vertical motion nor by gravity (which is vertical). Note this case is true for ideal
conditions only. In the real world, air resistance affects the speed of the balls in both directions.
The two-dimensional curved path of the horizontally thrown ball is composed of two independent one-dimensional
motions (horizontal and vertical). The key to analyzing such motion, called projectile motion, is to resolve it into
motions along perpendicular directions. Resolving two-dimensional motion into perpendicular components is
possible because the components are independent.
4.2 Acceleration Vector
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the acceleration vector given the velocity function in unit vector notation.
• Describe the motion of a particle with a constant acceleration in three dimensions.
• Use the one-dimensional motion equations along perpendicular axes to solve a problem in two or three
dimensions with a constant acceleration.
• Express the acceleration in unit vector notation.
Instantaneous Acceleration
In addition to obtaining the displacement and velocity vectors of an object in motion, we often want to know its
acceleration vector at any point in time along its trajectory. This acceleration vector is the instantaneous
acceleration and it can be obtained from the derivative with respect to time of the velocity function, as we have seen
in a previous chapter. The only difference in two or three dimensions is that these are now vector quantities. Taking
the derivative with respect to time we find
154 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
4.8
The acceleration in terms of components is
4.9
Also, since the velocity is the derivative of the position function, we can write the acceleration in terms of the second
derivative of the position function:
4.10
EXAMPLE 4.4
(a) What is the acceleration function? (b) What is the
Finding an Acceleration Vector
A particle has a velocity of acceleration vector at t= 2.0 s? Find its magnitude and direction.
Solution
(a) We take the first derivative with respect to time of the velocity function to find the acceleration. The derivative is
taken component by component:
(b) Evaluating the acceleration is
Significance
In this example we find that acceleration has a time dependence and is changing throughout the motion. Let’s
consider a different velocity function for the particle.
gives us the direction in unit vector notation. The magnitude of
EXAMPLE 4.5
(a) What is the velocity? (b) What is the
Finding a Particle Acceleration
A particle has a position function acceleration? (c) Describe the motion from t= 0 s.
Strategy
We can gain some insight into the problem by looking at the position function. It is linear in y and z, so we know the
acceleration in these directions is zero when we take the second derivative. Also, note that the position in the x
direction is zero for t= 0 s and t= 10 s.
Solution
(a) Taking the derivative with respect to time of the position function, we find
The velocity function is linear in time in the x direction and is constant in the y and z directions.
(b) Taking the derivative of the velocity function, we find
Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 • Acceleration Vector 155
The acceleration vector is a constant in the negative x-direction.
(c) The trajectory of the particle can be seen in Figure 4.9. Let’s look in the y and z directions first. The particle’s
position increases steadily as a function of time with a constant velocity in these directions. In the x direction,
however, the particle follows a path in positive x until t= 5 s, when it reverses direction. We know this from looking
at the velocity function, which becomes zero at this time and negative thereafter. We also know this because the
acceleration is negative and constant—meaning, the particle is accelerating in the opposite direction. The particle’s
position reaches 25 m, where it then reverses direction and begins to accelerate in the negative x direction. The
position reaches zero at t= 10 s.
FIGURE 4.9 The particle starts at point (x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0) with position vector as shown with red stars. The projection of the trajectory
onto the xy-plane is shown with blue dots. The values of y and z increase linearly as a function of time, whereas x has a turning point at t= 5
s and 25 m, when it reverses direction. At this point, the x component of the velocity becomes negative. At t= 10 s, the particle is back to 0
m in the x direction.
Significance
kinematic equations.
By graphing the trajectory of the particle, we can better understand its motion, given by the numerical results of the
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.2
Suppose the acceleration function has the form be said about the functional form of the velocity function?
where a , b , and c are constants. What can
Constant Acceleration
Multidimensional motion with constant acceleration can be treated the same way as shown in the previous chapter
for one-dimensional motion. Earlier we showed that three-dimensional motion is equivalent to three one-
dimensional motions, each along an axis perpendicular to the others. To develop the relevant equations in each
direction, let’s consider the two-dimensional problem of a particle moving in the xy plane with constant
156 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
acceleration, ignoring the z-component for the moment. The acceleration vector is
Each component of the motion has a separate set of equations similar to Equation 3.10–Equation 3.14 of the
previous chapter on one-dimensional motion. We show only the equations for position and velocity in the x- and
y-directions. A similar set of kinematic equations could be written for motion in the z-direction:
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
Here the subscript 0 denotes the initial position or velocity. Equation 4.11 to Equation 4.18 can be substituted into
Equation 4.2 and Equation 4.5 without the z-component to obtain the position vector and velocity vector as a
function of time in two dimensions:
The following example illustrates a practical use of the kinematic equations in two dimensions.
EXAMPLE 4.6
A Skier
Figure 4.10 shows a skier moving with an acceleration of down a slope of coordinate system at the front of the lodge, her initial position and velocity are
at t= 0. With the origin of the
and
(a) What are the x- and y-components of the skier’s position and velocity as functions of time? (b) What are her
position and velocity at t= 10.0 s?
Access for free at openstax.org
4.2 • Acceleration Vector 157
down a slope of The origin of the coordinate system is at the ski lodge.
FIGURE 4.10 A skier has an acceleration of Strategy
Since we are evaluating the components of the motion equations in the x and y directions, we need to find the
components of the acceleration and put them into the kinematic equations. The components of the acceleration are
found by referring to the coordinate system in Figure 4.10. Then, by inserting the components of the initial position
and velocity into the motion equations, we can solve for her position and velocity at a later time t .
Solution
(a) The origin of the coordinate system is at the top of the hill with y-axis vertically upward and the x-axis horizontal.
By looking at the trajectory of the skier, the x-component of the acceleration is positive and the y-component is
negative. Since the angle is down the slope, we find
Inserting the initial position and velocity into Equation 4.12 and Equation 4.13 for x, we have
For y, we have
(b) Now that we have the equations of motion for x and y as functions of time, we can evaluate them at t= 10.0 s:
158 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
The position and velocity at t= 10.0 s are, finally,
The magnitude of the velocity of the skier at 10.0 s is 25 m/s, which is 60 mi/h.
Significance
It is useful to know that, given the initial conditions of position, velocity, and acceleration of an object, we can find
the position, velocity, and acceleration at any later time.
With Equation 4.8 through Equation 4.10 we have completed the set of expressions for the position, velocity, and
acceleration of an object moving in two or three dimensions. If the trajectories of the objects look something like the
“Red Arrows” in the opening picture for the chapter, then the expressions for the position, velocity, and acceleration
can be quite complicated. In the sections to follow we examine two special cases of motion in two and three
dimensions by looking at projectile motion and circular motion.
INTERACTIVE
At this University of Colorado Boulder website (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21phetmotladyb), you can explore the
position velocity and acceleration of a ladybug with an interactive simulation that allows you to change these
parameters.
4.3 Projectile Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use one-dimensional motion in perpendicular directions to analyze projectile motion.
• Calculate the range, time of flight, and maximum height of a projectile that is launched and impacts a flat,
horizontal surface.
• Find the time of flight and impact velocity of a projectile that lands at a different height from that of
launch.
• Calculate the trajectory of a projectile.
Projectile motion is the motion of an object thrown or projected into the air, subject only to acceleration as a result
of gravity. The applications of projectile motion in physics and engineering are numerous. Some examples include
meteors as they enter Earth’s atmosphere, fireworks, and the motion of any ball in sports. Such objects are called
projectiles and their path is called a trajectory. The motion of falling objects as discussed in Motion Along a Straight
Line is a simple one-dimensional type of projectile motion in which there is no horizontal movement. In this section,
we consider two-dimensional projectile motion, and our treatment neglects the effects of air resistance.
The most important fact to remember here is that motions along perpendicular axes are independentand thus can
be analyzed separately. We discussed this fact in Displacement and Velocity Vectors, where we saw that vertical and
horizontal motions are independent. The key to analyzing two-dimensional projectile motion is to break it into two
motions: one along the horizontal axis and the other along the vertical. (This choice of axes is the most sensible
because acceleration resulting from gravity is vertical; thus, there is no acceleration along the horizontal axis when
air resistance is negligible.) As is customary, we call the horizontal axis the x-axis and the vertical axis the y-axis. It
is not required that we use this choice of axes; it is simply convenient in the case of gravitational acceleration. In
other cases we may choose a different set of axes. Figure 4.11 illustrates the notation for displacement, where we
define to be the total displacement, and and are its component vectors along the horizontal and vertical axes,
respectively. The magnitudes of these vectors are s, x, and y.
Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 • Projectile Motion 159
FIGURE 4.11 The total displacement s of a soccer ball at a point along its path. The vector and vertical axes. Its magnitude is s and it makes an angle Φwith the horizontal.
has components and along the horizontal
To describe projectile motion completely, we must include velocity and acceleration, as well as displacement. We
must find their components along the x- and y-axes. Let’s assume all forces except gravity (such as air resistance
and friction, for example) are negligible. Defining the positive direction to be upward, the components of
acceleration are then very simple:
If Because gravity is vertical, this means the initial velocity in the x direction is equal to the final
velocity in the x direction, or With these conditions on acceleration and velocity, we can write the
kinematic Equation 4.11 through Equation 4.18 for motion in a uniform gravitational field, including the rest of the
kinematic equations for a constant acceleration from Motion with Constant Acceleration. The kinematic equations
for motion in a uniform gravitational field become kinematic equations with
Horizontal Motion
4.19
Vertical Motion
4.20
4.21
4.22
4.23
Using this set of equations, we can analyze projectile motion, keeping in mind some important points.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Projectile Motion
1. Resolve the motion into horizontal and vertical components along the x- and y-axes. The magnitudes of the
components of displacement along these axes are x and y . The magnitudes of the components of velocity
are where v is the magnitude of the velocity and θis its direction relative to the
horizontal, as shown in Figure 4.12.
160 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
2. 3. 4. Treat the motion as two independent one-dimensional motions: one horizontal and the other vertical. Use the
kinematic equations for horizontal and vertical motion presented earlier.
Solve for the unknowns in the two separate motions: one horizontal and one vertical. Note that the only
common variable between the motions is time t . The problem-solving procedures here are the same as those
for one-dimensional kinematics and are illustrated in the following solved examples.
Recombine quantities in the horizontal and vertical directions to find the total displacement and velocity
Solve for the magnitude and direction of the displacement and velocity using
where Φis the direction of the displacement
FIGURE 4.12 (a) We analyze two-dimensional projectile motion by breaking it into two independent one-dimensional motions along the
vertical and horizontal axes. (b) The horizontal motion is simple, because and is a constant. (c) The velocity in the vertical
direction begins to decrease as the object rises. At its highest point, the vertical velocity is zero. As the object falls toward Earth again, the
vertical velocity increases again in magnitude but points in the opposite direction to the initial vertical velocity. (d) The x and y motions are
recombined to give the total velocity at any given point on the trajectory.
EXAMPLE 4.7
A Fireworks Projectile Explodes High and Away
During a fireworks display, a shell is shot into the air with an initial speed of 70.0 m/s at an angle of above the
horizontal, as illustrated in Figure 4.13. The fuse is timed to ignite the shell just as it reaches its highest point above
the ground. (a) Calculate the height at which the shell explodes. (b) How much time passes between the launch of
the shell and the explosion? (c) What is the horizontal displacement of the shell when it explodes? (d) What is the
total displacement from the point of launch to the highest point?
Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 • Projectile Motion 161
We can then define
FIGURE 4.13 The trajectory of a fireworks shell. The fuse is set to explode the shell at the highest point in its trajectory, which is found to be
at a height of 233 m and 125 m away horizontally.
Strategy
The motion can be broken into horizontal and vertical motions in which and to be zero and solve for the desired quantities.
and Solution
(a) By “height” we mean the altitude or vertical position y above the starting point. The highest point in any
trajectory, called the apex, is reached when Since we know the initial and final velocities, as well as the
initial position, we use the following equation to find y:
Because and are both zero, the equation simplifies to
Solving for y gives
Now we must find is the initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and the component of the initial velocity in the y direction. It is given by is the initial angle. Thus,
where
and y is
Thus, we have
Note that because up is positive, the initial vertical velocity is positive, as is the maximum height, but the
acceleration resulting from gravity is negative. Note also that the maximum height depends only on the vertical
component of the initial velocity, so that any projectile with a 67.6-m/s initial vertical component of velocity reaches
a maximum height of 233 m (neglecting air resistance). The numbers in this example are reasonable for large
fireworks displays, the shells of which do reach such heights before exploding. In practice, air resistance is not
completely negligible, so the initial velocity would have to be somewhat larger than that given to reach the same
height.
162 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
(b) As in many physics problems, there is more than one way to solve for the time the projectile reaches its highest
point. In this case, the easiest method is to use Because at the apex, this equation reduces
to simply
or
This is
This time is also reasonable for large fireworks. If you are able to see the launch of fireworks, notice that several
seconds pass before the shell explodes. Another way of finding the time is by using left for you as an exercise to complete.
(c) Because air resistance is negligible, and the horizontal velocity is constant, as discussed earlier. The
horizontal displacement is the horizontal velocity multiplied by time as given by where is equal to
zero. Thus,
where is the x-component of the velocity, which is given by
Time tfor both motions is the same, so x is
Horizontal motion is a constant velocity in the absence of air resistance. The horizontal displacement found here
could be useful in keeping the fireworks fragments from falling on spectators. When the shell explodes, air
resistance has a major effect, and many fragments land directly below.
(d) The horizontal and vertical components of the displacement were just calculated, so all that is needed here is to
find the magnitude and direction of the displacement at the highest point:
Note that the angle for the displacement vector is less than the initial angle of launch. To see why this is, review
Figure 4.11, which shows the curvature of the trajectory toward the ground level.
When solving Example 4.7(a), the expression we found for y is valid for any projectile motion when air resistance is
negligible. Call the maximum height y = h . Then,
This equation defines the maximum height of a projectile above its launch position and it depends only on the
vertical component of the initial velocity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.3
A rock is thrown horizontally off a cliff high with a velocity of 15.0 m/s. (a) Define the origin of the
coordinate system. (b) Which equation describes the horizontal motion? (c) Which equations describe the vertical
motion? (d) What is the rock’s velocity at the point of impact?
Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 • Projectile Motion 163
EXAMPLE 4.8
Calculating Projectile Motion: Tennis Player
A tennis player wins a match at Arthur Ashe stadium and hits a ball into the stands at 30 m/s and at an angle
above the horizontal (Figure 4.14). On its way down, the ball is caught by a spectator 10 m above the point where
the ball was hit. (a) Calculate the time it takes the tennis ball to reach the spectator. (b) What are the magnitude and
direction of the ball’s velocity at impact?
FIGURE 4.14 The trajectory of a tennis ball hit into the stands.
Strategy
Again, resolving this two-dimensional motion into two independent one-dimensional motions allows us to solve for
the desired quantities. The time a projectile is in the air is governed by its vertical motion alone. Thus, we solve for t
first. While the ball is rising and falling vertically, the horizontal motion continues at a constant velocity. This
example asks for the final velocity. Thus, we recombine the vertical and horizontal results to obtain at final time t ,
determined in the first part of the example.
Solution
(a) While the ball is in the air, it rises and then falls to a final position 10.0 m higher than its starting altitude. We can
find the time for this by using Equation 4.22:
If we take the initial position vertical component of the initial velocity:
to be zero, then the final position is y = 10 m. The initial vertical velocity is the
Substituting into Equation 4.22 for y gives us
Rearranging terms gives a quadratic equation in t :
Use of the quadratic formula yields t= 3.79 s and t= 0.54 s. Since the ball is at a height of 10 m at two times during
its trajectory—once on the way up and once on the way down—we take the longer solution for the time it takes the
ball to reach the spectator:
164 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
The time for projectile motion is determined completely by the vertical motion. Thus, any projectile that has an
initial vertical velocity of 21.2 m/s and lands 10.0 m above its starting altitude spends 3.79 s in the air.
(b) We can find the final horizontal and vertical velocities and with the use of the result from (a). Then, we can
combine them to find the magnitude of the total velocity vector and the angle it makes with the horizontal. Since
is constant, we can solve for it at any horizontal location. We choose the starting point because we know both the
initial velocity and the initial angle. Therefore,
The final vertical velocity is given by Equation 4.21:
Since was found in part (a) to be 21.2 m/s, we have
The magnitude of the final velocity is
The direction is found using the inverse tangent:
Significance
(a) As mentioned earlier, the time for projectile motion is determined completely by the vertical motion. Thus, any
projectile that has an initial vertical velocity of 21.2 m/s and lands 10.0 m above its starting altitude spends 3.79 s in
the air. (b) The negative angle means the velocity is below the horizontal at the point of impact. This result is
consistent with the fact that the ball is impacting at a point on the other side of the apex of the trajectory and
therefore has a negative y component of the velocity. The magnitude of the velocity is less than the magnitude of the
initial velocity we expect since it is impacting 10.0 m above the launch elevation.
Time of Flight, Trajectory, and Range
Of interest are the time of flight, trajectory, and range for a projectile launched on a flat horizontal surface and
impacting on the same surface. In this case, kinematic equations give useful expressions for these quantities, which
are derived in the following sections.
Time of flight
We can solve for the time of flight of a projectile that is both launched and impacts on a flat horizontal surface by
performing some manipulations of the kinematic equations. We note the position and displacement in y must be
zero at launch and at impact on an even surface. Thus, we set the displacement in y equal to zero and find
Factoring, we have
Solving for tgives us
4.24
This is the time of flight for a projectile both launched and impacting on a flat horizontal surface. Equation 4.24
Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 • Projectile Motion 165
does not apply when the projectile lands at a different elevation than it was launched, as we saw in Example 4.8 of
the tennis player hitting the ball into the stands. The other solution, t= 0, corresponds to the time at launch. The
time of flight is linearly proportional to the initial velocity in the y direction and inversely proportional to g. Thus, on
the Moon, where gravity is one-sixth that of Earth, a projectile launched with the same velocity as on Earth would be
airborne six times as long.
Trajectory
The trajectory of a projectile can be found by eliminating the time variable tfrom the kinematic equations for
arbitrary tand solving for y(x). We take so the projectile is launched from the origin. The kinematic
equation for x gives
Substituting the expression for tinto the equation for the position gives
Rearranging terms, we have
4.25
This trajectory equation is of the form which is an equation of a parabola with coefficients
Range
From the trajectory equation we can also find the range, or the horizontal distance traveled by the projectile.
Factoring Equation 4.25, we have
The position y is zero for both the launch point and the impact point, since we are again considering only a flat
horizontal surface. Setting y = 0 in this equation gives solutions x = 0, corresponding to the launch point, and
corresponding to the impact point. Using the trigonometric identity we find
and setting x = Rfor range,
4.26
Note particularly that Equation 4.26 is valid only for launch and impact on a horizontal surface. We see the range is
directly proportional to the square of the initial speed and , and it is inversely proportional to the
acceleration of gravity. Thus, on the Moon, the range would be six times greater than on Earth for the same initial
velocity. Furthermore, we see from the factor that the range is maximum at These results are shown in
Figure 4.15. In (a) we see that the greater the initial velocity, the greater the range. In (b), we see that the range is
maximum at This is true only for conditions neglecting air resistance. If air resistance is considered, the
maximum angle is somewhat smaller. It is interesting that the same range is found for two initial launch angles that
sum to The projectile launched with the smaller angle has a lower apex than the higher angle, but they both
have the same range.
166 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.15 Trajectories of projectiles on level ground. (a) The greater the initial speed the greater the range for a given initial angle.
(b) The effect of initial angle on the range of a projectile with a given initial speed. Note that the range is the same for initial angles of
and although the maximum heights of those paths are different.
EXAMPLE 4.9
Comparing Golf Shots
A golfer encounters two different situations on different holes. On the second hole they are 120 m from the green
and want to hit the ball 90 m and let it run onto the green. They angle the shot low to the ground at to the
horizontal to let the ball roll after impact. On the fourth hole they are 90 m from the green and want to let the ball
drop with a minimum amount of rolling after impact. Here, they angle the shot at to the horizontal to minimize
rolling after impact. Both shots are hit and impacted on a level surface.
(a) What is the initial speed of the ball at the second hole?
(b) What is the initial speed of the ball at the fourth hole?
(c) Write the trajectory equation for both cases.
(d) Graph the trajectories.
Strategy
We see that the range equation has the initial speed and angle, so we can solve for the initial speed for both (a) and
(b). When we have the initial speed, we can use this value to write the trajectory equation.
Solution
(a)
(b)
Access for free at openstax.org
4.3 • Projectile Motion 167
(c)
(d) Using a graphing utility, we can compare the two trajectories, which are shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.16 Two trajectories of a golf ball with a range of 90 m. The impact points of both are at the same level as the launch point.
Significance
The initial speed for the shot at is greater than the initial speed of the shot at Note from Figure 4.16 that if
the two projectiles were launched at the same speed but at different angles, the projectiles would have the same
range as long as the angles were less than The launch angles in this example add to give a number greater than
Thus, the shot at has to have a greater launch speed to reach 90 m, otherwise it would land at a shorter
distance.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.4
If the two golf shots in Example 4.9 were launched at the same speed, which shot would have the greatest range?
When we speak of the range of a projectile on level ground, we assume Ris very small compared with the
circumference of Earth. If, however, the range is large, Earth curves away below the projectile and the acceleration
resulting from gravity changes direction along the path. The range is larger than predicted by the range equation
given earlier because the projectile has farther to fall than it would on level ground, as shown in Figure 4.17, which
is based on a drawing in Newton’s P rincipia. If the initial speed is great enough, the projectile goes into orbit. Earth’s
surface drops 5 m every 8000 m. In 1 s an object falls 5 m without air resistance. Thus, if an object is given a
168 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
horizontal velocity of 8000 m/s (or 18,000 mi/hr) near Earth’s surface, it will go into orbit around the planet because
the surface continuously falls away from the object. This is roughly the speed of the Space Shuttle in a low Earth
orbit when it was operational, or any satellite in a low Earth orbit. These and other aspects of orbital motion, such as
Earth’s rotation, are covered in greater depth in Gravitation.
FIGURE 4.17 Projectile to satellite. In each case shown here, a projectile is launched from a very high tower to avoid air resistance. With
increasing initial speed, the range increases and becomes longer than it would be on level ground because Earth curves away beneath its
path. With a speed of 8000 m/s, orbit is achieved.
INTERACTIVE
At PhET Explorations: Projectile Motion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21phetpromot), learn about projectile motion in
terms of the launch angle and initial velocity.
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Solve for the centripetal acceleration of an object moving on a circular path.
• Use the equations of circular motion to find the position, velocity, and acceleration of a particle executing
circular motion.
• Explain the differences between centripetal acceleration and tangential acceleration resulting from
nonuniform circular motion.
• Evaluate centripetal and tangential acceleration in nonuniform circular motion, and find the total
acceleration vector.
Uniform circular motion is a specific type of motion in which an object travels in a circle with a constant speed. For
example, any point on a propeller spinning at a constant rate is executing uniform circular motion. Other examples
are the second, minute, and hour hands of a watch. It is remarkable that points on these rotating objects are
actually accelerating, although the rotation rate is a constant. To see this, we must analyze the motion in terms of
vectors.
Centripetal Acceleration
In one-dimensional kinematics, objects with a constant speed have zero acceleration. However, in two- and three-
dimensional kinematics, even if the speed is a constant, a particle can have acceleration if it moves along a curved
trajectory such as a circle. In this case the velocity vector is changing, or This is shown in Figure 4.18. As
the particle moves counterclockwise in time on the circular path, its position vector moves from to
Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 • Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion 169
The velocity vector has constant magnitude and is tangent to the path as it changes from its direction only. Since the velocity vector is perpendicular to the position vector the position vectors and and the velocity vectors and are similar. Furthermore, since the two triangles are isosceles. From these facts we can make the assertion
to the triangles formed by
changing
and
or
FIGURE 4.18 (a) A particle is moving in a circle at a constant speed, with position and velocity vectors at times vectors forming a triangle. The two triangles in the figure are similar. The vector and points toward the center of the circle in the limit
(b) Velocity
We can find the magnitude of the acceleration from
The direction of the acceleration can also be found by noting that as and therefore approach zero, the vector
approaches a direction perpendicular to In the limit is perpendicular to Since is tangent to the
circle, the acceleration points toward the center of the circle. Summarizing, a particle moving in a circle at a
constant speed has an acceleration with magnitude
4.27
The direction of the acceleration vector is toward the center of the circle (Figure 4.19). This is a radial acceleration
and is called the centripetal acceleration, which is why we give it the subscript c. The word centripetalcomes from
the Latin words centrum (meaning “center”) and pet ere (meaning “to seek”), and thus takes the meaning “center
seeking.
”
170 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.19 The centripetal acceleration vector points toward the center of the circular path of motion and is an acceleration in the radial
direction. The velocity vector is also shown and is tangent to the circle.
Let’s investigate some examples that illustrate the relative magnitudes of the velocity, radius, and centripetal
acceleration.
EXAMPLE 4.10
Creating an Acceleration of 1 g
A jet is flying at 134.1 m/s along a straight line and makes a turn along a circular path level with the ground. What
does the radius of the circle have to be to produce a centripetal acceleration of 1 g on the pilot and jet toward the
center of the circular trajectory?
Strategy
Given the speed of the jet, we can solve for the radius of the circle in the expression for the centripetal acceleration.
Solution
Set the centripetal acceleration equal to the acceleration of gravity:
Solving for the radius, we find
Significance
To create a greater acceleration than g on the pilot, the jet would either have to decrease the radius of its circular
trajectory or increase its speed on its existing trajectory or both.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.5
A flywheel has a radius of 20.0 cm. What is the speed of a point on the edge of the flywheel if it experiences a
centripetal acceleration of
Centripetal acceleration can have a wide range of values, depending on the speed and radius of curvature of the
circular path. Typical centripetal accelerations are given in the following table.
Object Centripetal Acceleration (m/s2 or factors of g)
Earth around the Sun
Moon around the Earth
TABLE 4.1 Typical Centripetal Accelerations
Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 • Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion 171
Object Centripetal Acceleration (m/s2 or factors of g)
Satellite in geosynchronous orbit 0.233
Outer edge of a CD when playing
Jet in a barrel roll (2–3 g)
Roller coaster (5 g)
Electron orbiting a proton in a simple Bohr model of the atom
TABLE 4.1 Typical Centripetal Accelerations
Equations of Motion for Uniform Circular Motion
A particle executing circular motion can be described by its position vector Figure 4.20 shows a particle
executing circular motion in a counterclockwise direction. As the particle moves on the circle, its position vector
sweeps out the angle with the x-axis. Vector making an angle with the x-axis is shown with its components
along the x- and y-axes. The magnitude of the position vector is and is also the radius of the circle, so that
in terms of its components,
4.28
Here, is a constant called the angular frequency of the particle. The angular frequency has units of radians (rad)
per second and is simply the number of radians of angular measure through which the particle passes per second.
The angle that the position vector has at any particular time is .
If Tis the period of motion, or the time to complete one revolution ( rad), then
FIGURE 4.20 The position vector for a particle in circular motion with its components along the x- and y-axes. The particle moves
counterclockwise. Angle is the angular frequency in radians per second multiplied by t .
Velocity and acceleration can be obtained from the position function by differentiation:
4.29
It can be shown from Figure 4.20 that the velocity vector is tangential to the circle at the location of the particle,
with magnitude Similarly, the acceleration vector is found by differentiating the velocity:
172 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
4.30
From this equation we see that the acceleration vector has magnitude vector, toward the origin, because
and is directed opposite the position
EXAMPLE 4.11
Circular Motion of a Proton
A proton has speed in the xy plane at time counterclockwise. Sketch the trajectory.
Solution
According to Equation 3.5,
and is moving in a circle in the xy plane of radius r = 0.175 m. What is its position
At t= 0, the position of the proton is and it circles
Since the period Tis the time it takes an object to go once arounce a circle, and the distance around a circle is 2π r,
we have:
From the given data, the proton has period and angular frequency:
The position of the particle at with A= 0.175 m is
From this result we see that the proton is located slightly below the x-axis. This is shown in Figure 4.21.
Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 • Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion 173
FIGURE 4.21 Position vector of the proton at the proton travels along the circle is 5.712 rad, which a little less than one complete revolution.
The trajectory of the proton is shown. The angle through which
Significance
We picked the initial position of the particle to be on the x-axis. This was completely arbitrary. If a different starting
position were given, we would have a different final position at t= 200 ns.
Nonuniform Circular Motion
Circular motion does not have to be at a constant speed. A particle can travel in a circle and speed up or slow down,
showing an acceleration in the direction of the motion.
In uniform circular motion, the particle executing circular motion has a constant speed and the circle is at a fixed
radius. If the speed of the particle is changing as well, then we introduce an additional acceleration in the direction
tangential to the circle. Such accelerations occur at a point on a top that is changing its spin rate, or any accelerating
rotor. In Displacement and Velocity Vectors we showed that centripetal acceleration is the time rate of change of the
direction of the velocity vector. If the speed of the particle is changing, then it has a tangential acceleration that is
the time rate of change of the magnitude of the velocity:
4.31
The direction of tangential acceleration is tangent to the circle whereas the direction of centripetal acceleration is
radially inward toward the center of the circle. Thus, a particle in circular motion with a tangential acceleration has a
total acceleration that is the vector sum of the centripetal and tangential accelerations:
4.32
The acceleration vectors are shown in Figure 4.22. Note that the two acceleration vectors perpendicular to each other, with in the radial direction and points at an angle between and
and are
in the tangential direction. The total acceleration
174 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
FIGURE 4.22 The centripetal acceleration points toward the center of the circle. The tangential acceleration is tangential to the circle at the
particle’s position. The total acceleration is the vector sum of the tangential and centripetal accelerations, which are perpendicular.
EXAMPLE 4.12
Total Acceleration during Circular Motion
A particle moves in a circle of radius r = 2.0 m. During the time interval from t= 1.5 s to t= 4.0 s its speed varies with
time according to
What is the total acceleration of the particle at t= 2.0 s?
Strategy
We are given the speed of the particle and the radius of the circle, so we can calculate centripetal acceleration
easily. The direction of the centripetal acceleration is toward the center of the circle. We find the magnitude of the
tangential acceleration by taking the derivative with respect to time of using Equation 4.31 and evaluating it at
t= 2.0 s. We use this and the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration to find the total acceleration.
Solution
Centripetal acceleration is
directed toward the center of the circle. Tangential acceleration is
Total acceleration is
and from the tangent to the circle. See Figure 4.23.
Access for free at openstax.org
4.5 • Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions 175
FIGURE 4.23 The tangential and centripetal acceleration vectors. The net acceleration is the vector sum of the two accelerations.
Significance
The directions of centripetal and tangential accelerations can be described more conveniently in terms of a polar
coordinate system, with unit vectors in the radial and tangential directions. This coordinate system, which is used for
motion along curved paths, is discussed in detail later in the book.
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of reference frames.
• Write the position and velocity vector equations for relative motion.
• Draw the position and velocity vectors for relative motion.
• Analyze one-dimensional and two-dimensional relative motion problems using the position and velocity
vector equations.
Motion does not happen in isolation. If you’re riding in a train moving at 10 m/s east, this velocity is measured
relative to the ground on which you’re traveling. However, if another train passes you at 15 m/s east, your velocity
relative to this other train is different from your velocity relative to the ground. Your velocity relative to the other
train is 5 m/s west. To explore this idea further, we first need to establish some terminology.
Reference Frames
To discuss relative motion in one or more dimensions, we first introduce the concept of reference frames. When we
say an object has a certain velocity, we must state it has a velocity with respect to a given reference frame. In most
examples we have examined so far, this reference frame has been Earth. If you say a person is sitting in a train
moving at 10 m/s east, then you imply the person on the train is moving relative to the surface of Earth at this
velocity, and Earth is the reference frame. We can expand our view of the motion of the person on the train and say
Earth is spinning in its orbit around the Sun, in which case the motion becomes more complicated. In this case, the
solar system is the reference frame. In summary, all discussion of relative motion must define the reference frames
involved. We now develop a method to refer to reference frames in relative motion. This method makes an
approximation that breaks down near the speed of light, where the more accurate methods or special relativity are
needed, but is extremely accurate for everyday speeds (Relativity (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-
volume-3/pages/5-introduction)).
Relative Motion in One Dimension
We introduce relative motion in one dimension first, because the velocity vectors simplify to having only two
possible directions. Take the example of the person sitting in a train moving east. If we choose east as the positive
direction and Earth as the reference frame, then we can write the velocity of the train with respect to the Earth as
east, where the subscripts TE refer to train and Earth. Let’s now say the person gets up out of her
seat and walks toward the back of the train at 2 m/s. This tells us she has a velocity relative to the reference frame
176 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
of the train. Since the person is walking west, in the negative direction, we write her velocity with respect to the train
as We can add the two velocity vectors to find the velocity of the person with respect to Earth. This
relative velocity is written as
4.33
Note the ordering of the subscripts for the various reference frames in Equation 4.33. The subscripts for the
coupling reference frame, which is the train, appear consecutively in the right-hand side of the equation. Figure 4.24
shows the correct order of subscripts when forming the vector equation.
FIGURE 4.24 When constructing the vector equation, the subscripts for the coupling reference frame appear consecutively on the inside.
The subscripts on the left-hand side of the equation are the same as the two outside subscripts on the right-hand side of the equation.
Adding the vectors, we find this is shown in Figure 4.25.
so the person is moving 8 m/s east with respect to Earth. Graphically,
FIGURE 4.25 Velocity vectors of the train with respect to Earth, person with respect to the train, and person with respect to Earth.
Relative Velocity in Two Dimensions
We can now apply these concepts to describing motion in two dimensions. Consider a particle Pand reference
frames Sand as measured in as shown in Figure 4.26. The position of the origin of as measured in Sis the position of P
is and the position of Pas measured in Sis
FIGURE 4.26 The positions of particle Prelative to frames Sand are and respectively.
From Figure 4.26 we see that
4.34
The relative velocities are the time derivatives of the position vectors. Therefore,
4.35
The velocity of a particle relative t o S is equal t o its velocity relative t o plus the velocity of relative t o S .
Access for free at openstax.org
4.5 • Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions 177
We can extend Equation 4.35 to any number of reference frames. For particle Pwith velocities
in frames A , B , and C ,
4.36
We can also see how the accelerations are related as observed in two reference frames by differentiating Equation
4.35:
4.37
We see that if the velocity of relative to Sis a constant, then and
4.38
This says the acceleration of a particle is the same as measured by two observers moving at a constant velocity
relative to each other.
EXAMPLE 4.13
Motion of a Car Relative to a Truck
A truck is traveling south at a speed of 70 km/h toward an intersection. A car is traveling east toward the
intersection at a speed of 80 km/h (Figure 4.27). What is the velocity of the car relative to the truck?
FIGURE 4.27 A car travels east toward an intersection while a truck travels south toward the same intersection.
Strategy
First, we must establish the reference frame common to both vehicles, which is Earth. Then, we write the velocities
of each with respect to the reference frame of Earth, which enables us to form a vector equation that links the car,
the truck, and Earth to solve for the velocity of the car with respect to the truck.
Solution
The velocity of the car with respect to Earth is The velocity of the truck with respect to Earth is
Using the velocity addition rule, the relative motion equation we are seeking is
178 4 • Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
Here, the truck: is the velocity of the car with respect to the truck, and Earth is the connecting reference frame. Since we
have the velocity of the truck with respect to Earth, the negative of this vector is the velocity of Earth with respect to
The vector diagram of this equation is shown in Figure 4.28.
FIGURE 4.28 Vector diagram of the vector equation .
We can now solve for the velocity of the car with respect to the truck:
and
Significance
objects.
Drawing a vector diagram showing the velocity vectors can help in understanding the relative velocity of the two
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 4.6
A boat heads due north, moving at 4.5 m/s relative to the water of a river that is running east at 3.0 m/s. What is the
velocity of the boat with respect to Earth?
EXAMPLE 4.14
Flying a Plane in a Wind
A pilot must fly a plane due north to reach their destination. The plane can fly at 300 km/h in still air. A wind is
blowing out of the northeast at 90 km/h. (a) In what direction must the pilot head the plane to fly due north? (b)
What is the speed of the plane relative to the ground?
Strategy
The pilot must point the plane somewhat east of north to compensate for the wind velocity. We need to construct a
vector equation that contains the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground, the velocity of the plane with
respect to the air, and the velocity of the air with respect to the ground. Since these last two quantities are known,
we can solve for the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground. We can graph the vectors and use this diagram
to evaluate the magnitude of the plane’s velocity with respect to the ground. The diagram will also tell us the angle
the plane’s velocity makes with north with respect to the air, which is the direction the pilot must head the plane.
Access for free at openstax.org
4.5 • Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions 179
Solution
The vector equation is the plane’s heading,
where P = plane, A = air, and G = ground. From the geometry in Figure
4.29, we can solve easily for the magnitude of the velocity of the plane with respect to the ground and the angle of
FIGURE 4.29 Vector diagram for Equation 4.34 showing the vectors
Known quantities:
(a) In the x direction we have the following:
•
•
• east of north
(b) In the y direction we have the following:
•
•
•
180 4 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
acceleration vector instantaneous acceleration
found by taking the derivative of the velocity
function with respect to time in unit vector notation
angular frequency rate of change of an angle with
which an object that is moving on a circular path
centripetal acceleration component of acceleration
of an object moving in a circle that is directed
radially inward toward the center of the circle
displacement vector vector from the initial position
to a final position on a trajectory of a particle
position vector vector from the origin of a chosen
coordinate system to the position of a particle in
two- or three-dimensional space
projectile motion motion of an object subject only to
the acceleration of gravity
range maximum horizontal distance a projectile
travels
Key Equations
Position vector
Displacement vector
Velocity vector
Velocity in terms of components
Velocity components
Average velocity
Instantaneous acceleration
Instantaneous acceleration, component form
Instantaneous acceleration as second
derivatives of position
Time of flight
Trajectory
reference frame coordinate system in which the
position, velocity, and acceleration of an object at
rest or moving is measured
relative velocity velocity of an object as observed
from a particular reference frame, or the velocity of
one reference frame with respect to another
reference frame
tangential acceleration magnitude of which is the
time rate of change of speed. Its direction is tangent
to the circle.
time of flight elapsed time a projectile is in the air
total acceleration vector sum of centripetal and
tangential accelerations
trajectory path of a projectile through the air
velocity vector vector that gives the instantaneous
speed and direction of a particle; tangent to the
trajectory
Range
Centripetal acceleration
Position vector, uniform circular motion
Velocity vector, uniform circular motion
Acceleration vector, uniform circular motion
Tangential acceleration
Total acceleration
Access for free at openstax.org
Position vector in frame
Sis the position
vector in frame plus the vector from the
origin of Sto the origin of
Relative velocity equation connecting two
reference frames
Relative velocity equation connecting more
than two reference frames
Relative acceleration equation
Summary
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
• The position function gives the position as a
function of time of a particle moving in two or
three dimensions. Graphically, it is a vector from
the origin of a chosen coordinate system to the
point where the particle is located at a specific
time.
• The displacement vector gives the shortest
distance between any two points on the
trajectory of a particle in two or three
dimensions.
• Instantaneous velocity gives the speed and
direction of a particle at a specific time on its
trajectory in two or three dimensions, and is a
vector in two and three dimensions.
• The velocity vector is tangent to the trajectory of
the particle.
• Displacement can be written as a vector sum
of the one-dimensional displacements
along the x, y, and z directions.
• Velocity can be written as a vector sum of
the one-dimensional velocities
along the x, y, and z directions.
• Motion in any given direction is independent of
motion in a perpendicular direction.
4.2 Acceleration Vector
• In two and three dimensions, the acceleration
vector can have an arbitrary direction and does
not necessarily point along a given component of
the velocity.
• The instantaneous acceleration is produced by a
change in velocity taken over a very short
(infinitesimal) time period. Instantaneous
acceleration is a vector in two or three
dimensions. It is found by taking the derivative of
the velocity function with respect to time.
• In three dimensions, acceleration can be
written as a vector sum of the one-dimensional
accelerations along the x-
,
y-, and z-axes.
4 • Chapter Review 181
• The kinematic equations for constant
acceleration can be written as the vector sum of
the constant acceleration equations in the x, y,
and z directions.
4.3 Projectile Motion
• Projectile motion is the motion of an object
subject only to the acceleration of gravity, where
the acceleration is constant, as near the surface
of Earth.
• To solve projectile motion problems, we analyze
the motion of the projectile in the horizontal and
vertical directions using the one-dimensional
kinematic equations for x and y.
• The time of flight of a projectile launched with
initial vertical velocity on an even surface is
given by
This equation is valid only when the projectile
lands at the same elevation from which it was
launched.
• The maximum horizontal distance traveled by a
projectile is called the range. Again, the equation
for range is valid only when the projectile lands at
the same elevation from which it was launched.
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
• Uniform circular motion is motion in a circle at
constant speed.
• Centripetal acceleration is the acceleration a
particle must have to follow a circular path.
Centripetal acceleration always points toward
the center of rotation and has magnitude
• Nonuniform circular motion occurs when there is
tangential acceleration of an object executing
circular motion such that the speed of the object
is changing. This acceleration is called tangential
acceleration The magnitude of tangential
acceleration is the time rate of change of the
182 4 • Chapter Review
magnitude of the velocity. The tangential
acceleration vector is tangential to the circle,
whereas the centripetal acceleration vector
points radially inward toward the center of the
circle. The total acceleration is the vector sum of
tangential and centripetal accelerations.
• An object executing uniform circular motion can
be described with equations of motion. The
position vector of the object is
magnitude circle, and where Ais the
which is also the radius of the
is the angular frequency.
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
4. 5. • When analyzing motion of an object, the
Conceptual Questions
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
1. What form does the trajectory of a particle have
if the distance from any point Ato point Bis
equal to the magnitude of the displacement
from Ato B ?
2. Give an example of a trajectory in two or three
dimensions caused by independent
perpendicular motions.
3. If the instantaneous velocity is zero, what can be
said about the slope of the position function?
4.2 Acceleration Vector
If the position function of a particle is a linear
function of time, what can be said about its
acceleration?
If an object has a constant x-component of the
velocity and suddenly experiences an
acceleration in the y direction, does the
x-component of its velocity change?
If an object has a constant x-component of
velocity and suddenly experiences an
acceleration at an angle of in the x direction,
does the x-component of velocity change?
4.3 Projectile Motion
7. Answer the following questions for projectile
motion on level ground assuming negligible air
resistance, with the initial angle being neither
nor (a) Is the velocity ever zero? (b) When
is the velocity a minimum? A maximum? (c) Can
the velocity ever be the same as the initial
velocity at a time other than at t= 0? (d) Can the
speed ever be the same as the initial speed at a
6. Access for free at openstax.org
reference frame in terms of position, velocity,
and acceleration needs to be specified.
• Relative velocity is the velocity of an object as
observed from a particular reference frame, and
it varies with the choice of reference frame.
• If Sand are two reference frames moving
relative to each other at a constant velocity, then
the velocity of an object relative to Sis equal to
its velocity relative to plus the velocity of
relative to S.
• If two reference frames are moving relative to
each other at a constant velocity, then the
accelerations of an object as observed in both
reference frames are equal.
8. 9. time other than at t= 0?
Answer the following questions for projectile
motion on level ground assuming negligible air
resistance, with the initial angle being neither
nor (a) Is the acceleration ever zero? (b) Is
the vector ever parallel or antiparallel to the
vector ? (c) Is the vector v ever perpendicular
to the vector a? If so, where is this located?
A dime is placed at the edge of a table so it
hangs over slightly. A quarter is slid horizontally
on the table surface perpendicular to the edge
and hits the dime head on. Which coin hits the
ground first?
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
10. 11. Can centripetal acceleration change the speed
of a particle undergoing circular motion?
Can tangential acceleration change the speed of
a particle undergoing circular motion?
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
12. 13. 14. What frame or frames of reference do you use
instinctively when driving a car? When flying in a
commercial jet?
A basketball player dribbling down the court
usually keeps his eyes fixed on the players
around him. He is moving fast. Why doesn’t he
need to keep his eyes on the ball?
If someone is riding in the back of a pickup truck
and throws a softball straight backward, is it
possible for the ball to fall straight down as
viewed by a person standing at the side of the
road? Under what condition would this occur?
15. How would the motion of the ball appear to the
person who threw it?
The hat of a jogger running at constant velocity
falls off the back of his head. Draw a sketch
showing the path of the hat in the jogger’s frame
of reference. Draw its path as viewed by a
stationary observer. Neglect air resistance.
Problems
4.1 Displacement and Velocity Vectors
17. The coordinates of a particle in a rectangular
coordinate system are (1.0, –4.0, 6.0). What is
the position vector of the particle?
The position of a particle changes from
to
What is the particle’s
18. 19. 20. 21. 22. displacement?
The 18th hole at Pebble Beach Golf Course is a
dogleg to the left of length 496.0 m. The fairway
off the tee is taken to be the x direction. A golfer
hits his tee shot a distance of 300.0 m,
corresponding to a displacement
and hits his second shot 189.0
m with a displacement
What is the final
displacement of the golf ball from where it
started?
A bird flies straight northeast a distance of 95.0
km for 3.0 h. With the x-axis due east and the
y-axis due north, what is the displacement in
unit vector notation for the bird? What is the
average velocity for the trip?
A cyclist rides 5.0 km due east, then 10.0 km
west of north. From this point she rides 8.0
km due west. What is the final displacement
from where the cyclist started?
New York Rangers defenseman Daniel Girardi
stands at the goal and passes a hockey puck 20
m and from straight down the ice to left wing
Chris Kreider waiting at the blue line. Kreider
waits for Girardi to reach the blue line and
passes the puck directly across the ice to him 10
m away. What is the final displacement of the
puck? See the following figure.
4 • Chapter Review 183
16. A clod of dirt falls from the bed of a moving
truck. It strikes the ground directly below the
end of the truck. (a) What is the direction of its
velocity relative to the truck just before it hits?
(b) Is this the same as the direction of its
velocity relative to ground just before it hits?
Explain your answers.
23. 24. 25. The position of a particle is
(a) What is the
s? (b)
velocity of the particle at 0 s and at What is the average velocity between 0 s and
s?
Clay Matthews, a linebacker for the Green Bay
Packers, can reach a speed of 10.0 m/s. At the
start of a play, Matthews runs downfield at
with respect to the 50-yard line and covers 8.0
m in 1 s. He then runs straight down the field at
with respect to the 50-yard line for 12 m,
with an elapsed time of 1.2 s. (a) What is
Matthews’ final displacement from the start of
the play? (b) What is his average velocity?
The F-35B Lighting II is a short-takeoff and
vertical landing fighter jet. If it does a vertical
takeoff to 20.00-m height above the ground and
then follows a flight path angled at with
respect to the ground for 20.00 km, what is the
final displacement?
4.2 Acceleration Vector
26. The position of a particle is
(a) Determine
its velocity and acceleration as functions of time.
(b) What are its velocity and acceleration at time
t= 0?
27. A particle’s acceleration is At
184 4 • Chapter Review
28. 29. 30. 31. t= 0, its position and velocity are zero. (a) What
are the particle’s position and velocity as
functions of time? (b) Find the equation of the
path of the particle. Draw the x- and y-axes and
sketch the trajectory of the particle.
A boat leaves the dock at t= 0 and heads out
into a lake with an acceleration of A
strong wind is pushing the boat, giving it an
additional velocity of (a)
What is the velocity of the boat at t= 10 s? (b)
What is the position of the boat at t= 10s? Draw
a sketch of the boat’s trajectory and position at t
= 10 s, showing the x- and y-axes.
The position of a particle for t> 0 is given by
(a) What
is the velocity as a function of time? (b) What is
the acceleration as a function of time? (c) What
is the particle’s velocity at t= 2.0 s? (d) What is
its speed at t= 1.0 s and t= 3.0 s? (e) What is
the average velocity between t= 1.0 s and t=
2.0 s?
The acceleration of a particle is a constant. At t=
0 the velocity of the particle is
At t= 4 s the velocity is (a) What is the
particle’s acceleration? (b) How do the position
and velocity vary with time? Assume the particle
is initially at the origin.
A particle has a position function
32. where the
arguments of the cosine and sine functions are
in radians. (a) What is the velocity vector? (b)
What is the acceleration vector?
A Lockheed Martin F-35 II Lighting jet takes off
from an aircraft carrier with a runway length of
90 m and a takeoff speed 70 m/s at the end of
the runway. Jets are catapulted into airspace
from the deck of an aircraft carrier with two
sources of propulsion: the jet propulsion and the
catapult. At the point of leaving the deck of the
aircraft carrier, the F-35’s acceleration
decreases to a constant acceleration of
at with respect to the horizontal. (a) What is
the initial acceleration of the F-35 on the deck of
the aircraft carrier to make it airborne? (b) Write
the position and velocity of the F-35 in unit
vector notation from the point it leaves the deck
of the aircraft carrier. (c) At what altitude is the
fighter 5.0 s after it leaves the deck of the
aircraft carrier? (d) What is its velocity and speed
at this time? (e) How far has it traveled
Access for free at openstax.org
34. horizontally?
4.3 Projectile Motion
33. A bullet is shot horizontally from shoulder height
(1.5 m) with an initial speed 200 m/s. (a) How
much time elapses before the bullet hits the
ground? (b) How far does the bullet travel
horizontally?
A marble rolls off a tabletop 1.0 m high and hits
the floor at a point 3.0 m away from the table’s
edge in the horizontal direction. (a) How long is
the marble in the air? (b) What is the speed of
the marble when it leaves the table’s edge? (c)
What is its speed when it hits the floor?
A dart is thrown horizontally at a speed of 10 m/s at
the bull’s-eye of a dartboard 2.4 m away, as in the
following figure. (a) How far below the intended
target does the dart hit? (b) What does your answer
tell you about how proficient dart players throw their
darts?
35. 36. An airplane flying horizontally with a speed of 500
km/h at a height of 800 m drops a crate of supplies
(see the following figure). If the parachute fails to
open, how far in front of the release point does the
crate hit the ground?
37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. Suppose the airplane in the preceding problem
fires a projectile horizontally in its direction of
motion at a speed of 300 m/s relative to the
plane. (a) How far in front of the release point
does the projectile hit the ground? (b) What is its
speed when it hits the ground?
A fastball pitcher can throw a baseball at a
speed of 40 m/s (90 mi/h). (a) Assuming the
pitcher can release the ball 16.7 m from home
plate so the ball is moving horizontally, how long
does it take the ball to reach home plate? (b)
How far does the ball drop between the pitcher’s
hand and home plate?
A projectile is launched at an angle of and
lands 20 s later at the same height as it was
launched. (a) What is the initial speed of the
projectile? (b) What is the maximum altitude? (c)
What is the range? (d) Calculate the
displacement from the point of launch to the
position on its trajectory at 15 s.
A basketball player shoots toward a basket 6.1
m away and 3.0 m above the floor. If the ball is
released 1.8 m above the floor at an angle of
above the horizontal, what must the initial speed
be if it were to go through the basket?
At a particular instant, a hot air balloon is 100 m
in the air and descending at a constant speed of
2.0 m/s. At this exact instant, a girl throws a ball
horizontally, relative to herself, with an initial
speed of 20 m/s. When she lands, where will she
find the ball? Ignore air resistance.
A man on a motorcycle traveling at a uniform
speed of 10 m/s throws an empty can straight
upward relative to himself with an initial speed
of 3.0 m/s. Find the equation of the trajectory as
seen by a police officer on the side of the road.
Assume the initial position of the can is the point
where it is thrown. Ignore air resistance.
43. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 4 • Chapter Review 185
An athlete can jump a distance of 8.0 m in the
broad jump. What is the maximum distance the
athlete can jump on the Moon, where the
gravitational acceleration is one-sixth that of
Earth?
The maximum horizontal distance a boy can
throw a ball is 50 m. Assume he can throw with
the same initial speed at all angles. How high
does he throw the ball when he throws it straight
upward?
A rock is thrown off a cliff at an angle of with
respect to the horizontal. The cliff is 100 m high.
The initial speed of the rock is 30 m/s. (a) How
high above the edge of the cliff does the rock
rise? (b) How far has it moved horizontally when
it is at maximum altitude? (c) How long after the
release does it hit the ground? (d) What is the
range of the rock? (e) What are the horizontal
and vertical positions of the rock relative to the
edge of the cliff at t= 2.0 s, t= 4.0 s, and t= 6.0
s?
Trying to escape his pursuers, a secret agent skis off
a slope inclined at below the horizontal at 60
km/h. To survive and land on the snow 100 m below,
he must clear a gorge 60 m wide. Does he make it?
Ignore air resistance.
A golfer on a fairway is 70 m away from the
green, which sits below the level of the fairway
by 20 m. If the golfer hits the ball at an angle of
with an initial speed of 20 m/s, how close to
the green does she come?
A projectile is shot at a hill, the base of which is 300
m away. The projectile is shot at above the
horizontal with an initial speed of 75 m/s. The hill
can be approximated by a plane sloped at to the
186 4 • Chapter Review
horizontal. Relative to the coordinate system shown
in the following figure, the equation of this straight
line is Where on the hill does
the projectile land?
49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. An astronaut on Mars kicks a soccer ball at an
angle of with an initial velocity of 15 m/s. If
the acceleration of gravity on Mars is ,
(a) what is the range of the soccer kick on a flat
surface? (b) What would be the range of the
same kick on the Moon, where gravity is one-
sixth that of Earth?
Mike Powell holds the record for the long jump
of 8.95 m, established in 1991. If he left the
ground at an angle of what was his initial
speed?
MIT’s robot cheetah can jump over obstacles 46
cm high and has speed of 12.0 km/h. (a) If the
robot launches itself at an angle of at this
speed, what is its maximum height? (b) What
would the launch angle have to be to reach a
height of 46 cm?
Mt. Asama, Japan, is an active volcano. In 2009,
an eruption threw solid volcanic rocks that
landed 1 km horizontally from the crater. If the
volcanic rocks were launched at an angle of
with respect to the horizontal and landed 900 m
below the crater, (a) what would be their initial
velocity and (b) what is their time of flight?
Drew Brees of the New Orleans Saints can throw
a football 23.0 m/s (50 mph). If he angles the
throw at from the horizontal, what distance
does it go if it is to be caught at the same
elevation as it was thrown?
The Lunar Roving Vehicle used in NASA’s late
Apol lo missions reached an unofficial lunar land
speed of by astronaut Eugene Cernan. If
the rover was moving at this speed on a flat
lunar surface and hit a small bump that
projected it off the surface at an angle of
how long would it be “airborne” on the Moon?
A soccer goal is 2.44 m high. A player kicks the
56. 57. 58. 59. ball at a distance 10 m from the goal at an angle
of The ball hits the crossbar at the top of
the goal. What is the initial speed of the soccer
ball?
Olympus Mons on Mars is the largest volcano in
the solar system, at a height of 25 km and with a
radius of 312 km. If you are standing on the
summit, with what initial velocity would you
have to fire a projectile from a cannon
horizontally to clear the volcano and land on the
surface of Mars? Note that Mars has an
acceleration of gravity of
In 1999, Robbie Knievel was the first to jump the
Grand Canyon on a motorcycle. At a narrow part
of the canyon (69.0 m wide) and traveling 35.8
m/s off the takeoff ramp, he reached the other
side. What was his launch angle?
You throw a baseball at an initial speed of 15.0
m/s at an angle of with respect to the
horizontal. What would the ball’s initial speed
have to be at on a planet that has twice the
acceleration of gravity as Earth to achieve the
same range? Consider launch and impact on a
horizontal surface.
Aaron Rodgers throws a football at 20.0 m/s to
his wide receiver, who is running straight down
the field at 9.4 m/s. If Aaron throws the football
when the wide receiver is 10.0 m in front of him,
(a) at what angle does Aaron have to launch the
ball so the ball will be at the same height as the
receiver when the receiver makes it to 20.0 m in
front of Aaron? (b) Will the receiver be able to
catch the ball?
4.4 Uniform and Nonuniform Circular Motion
60. 61. 62. 63. A flywheel is rotating at 30 rev/s. What is the
total angle, in radians, through which a point on
the flywheel rotates in 40 s?
A particle travels in a circle of radius 10 m at a
constant speed of 20 m/s. What is the
magnitude of the acceleration?
Cam Newton of the Carolina Panthers throws a
perfect football spiral at 8.0 rev/s. The radius of
a pro football is 8.5 cm at the middle of the short
side. What is the centripetal acceleration of the
laces on the football?
A fairground ride spins its occupants inside a
flying saucer-shaped container. If the horizontal
circular path the riders follow has an 8.00-m
radius, at how many revolutions per minute are
Access for free at openstax.org
64. 65. 66. 67. 68. the riders subjected to a centripetal acceleration
equal to that of gravity?
A runner taking part in the 200-m dash must run
around the end of a track that has a circular arc
with a radius of curvature of 30.0 m. The runner
starts the race at a constant speed. If she
completes the 200-m dash in 23.2 s and runs at
constant speed throughout the race, what is her
centripetal acceleration as she runs the curved
portion of the track?
What is the acceleration of Venus toward the
Sun, assuming a circular orbit?
An experimental jet rocket travels around Earth
along its equator just above its surface. At what
speed must the jet travel if the magnitude of its
acceleration is g?
A fan is rotating at a constant 360.0 rev/min.
What is the magnitude of the acceleration of a
point on one of its blades 10.0 cm from the axis
of rotation?
A point located on the second hand of a large
clock has a radial acceleration of far is the point from the axis of rotation of the
second hand?
How
4.5 Relative Motion in One and Two Dimensions
69. 70. The coordinate axes of the reference frame
remain parallel to those of , as moves away
from at a constant velocity
(a) If at time t
= 0 the origins coincide, what is the position of
the origin in the Sframe as a function of
time? (b) How is particle position for and
as measured in Sand respectively,
related? (c) What is the relationship between
particle velocities (d) How are
accelerations related?
The coordinate axes of the reference frame
remain parallel to those of S , as moves away
from Sat a constant velocity
. (a) If at time
t= 0 the origins coincide, what is the position of
origin in the Sframe as a function of time? (b)
How is particle position for and , as
measured in Sand respectively, related? (c)
What is the relationship between particle
velocities (d) How are
accelerations related?
71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 4 • Chapter Review 187
The velocity of a particle in reference frame Ais
The velocity of reference
frame Awith respect to reference frame Bis
and the velocity of reference frame B
with respect to Cis What is the velocity
of the particle in reference frame C ?
Raindrops fall vertically at 4.5 m/s relative to the
earth. What does an observer in a car moving at
22.0 m/s in a straight line measure as the
velocity of the raindrops?
A seagull can fly at a velocity of 9.00 m/s in still
air. (a) If it takes the bird 20.0 min to travel 6.00
km straight into an oncoming wind, what is the
velocity of the wind? (b) If the bird turns around
and flies with the wind, how long will it take the
bird to return 6.00 km?
A ship sets sail from Rotterdam, heading due
north at 7.00 m/s relative to the water. The local
ocean current is 1.50 m/s in a direction
north of east. What is the velocity of the ship
relative to Earth?
A boat can be rowed at 8.0 km/h in still water.
(a) How much time is required to row 1.5 km
downstream in a river moving 3.0 km/h relative
to the shore? (b) How much time is required for
the return trip? (c) In what direction must the
boat be aimed to row straight across the river?
(d) Suppose the river is 0.8 km wide. What is the
velocity of the boat with respect to Earth and
how much time is required to get to the opposite
shore? (e) Suppose, instead, the boat is aimed
straight across the river. How much time is
required to get across and how far downstream
is the boat when it reaches the opposite shore?
A small plane flies at 200 km/h in still air. If the
wind blows directly out of the west at 50 km/h,
(a) in what direction must the pilot head her
plane to move directly north across land and (b)
how long does it take her to reach a point 300
km directly north of her starting point?
A cyclist traveling southeast along a road at 15
km/h feels a wind blowing from the southwest at
25 km/h. To a stationary observer, what are the
speed and direction of the wind?
A river is moving east at 4.0 m/s. A boat starts
from the dock heading north of west at 7.0
m/s. If the river is 1800 m wide, (a) what is the
velocity of the boat with respect to Earth and (b)
how long does it take the boat to cross the river?
188 4 • Chapter Review
Additional Problems
79. 80. 81. 82. 83. A Formula One race car is traveling at 89.0 m/s
along a straight track enters a turn on the race
track with radius of curvature of 200.0 m. What
centripetal acceleration must the car have to
stay on the track?
A particle travels in a circular orbit of radius 10
m. Its speed is changing at a rate of an instant when its speed is 40.0 m/s. What is
the magnitude of the acceleration of the
particle?
at
The driver of a car moving at 90.0 km/h presses
down on the brake as the car enters a circular
curve of radius 150.0 m. If the speed of the car
is decreasing at a rate of 9.0 km/h each second,
what is the magnitude of the acceleration of the
car at the instant its speed is 60.0 km/h?
A race car entering the curved part of the track
at the Daytona 500 drops its speed from 85.0
m/s to 80.0 m/s in 2.0 s. If the radius of the
curved part of the track is 316.0 m, calculate the
total acceleration of the race car at the
beginning and ending of reduction of speed.
An elephant is located on Earth’s surface at a
latitude Calculate the centripetal acceleration of
the elephant resulting from the rotation of Earth
around its polar axis. Express your answer in terms
of the radius of Earth, and time Tfor one
rotation of Earth. Compare your answer with g for
84. 85. 86. 87. 88. A proton in a synchrotron is moving in a circle of
radius 1 km and increasing its speed by
(a) What is the proton’s total
acceleration at t= 5.0 s? (b) At what time does
the expression for the velocity become
unphysical?
A propeller blade at rest starts to rotate from t=
0 s to t= 5.0 s with a tangential acceleration of
the tip of the blade at The tip of the
blade is 1.5 m from the axis of rotation. At t=
5.0 s, what is the total acceleration of the tip of
the blade?
A particle is executing circular motion with a
constant angular frequency of If
time t= 0 corresponds to the position of the
particle being located at y = 0 m and x = 5 m, (a)
what is the position of the particle at t= 10 s?
(b) What is its velocity at this time? (c) What is
its acceleration?
A particle’s centripetal acceleration is
at t= 0 s where it is on the x-axis
and moving counterclockwise in the xy plane. It
is executing uniform circular motion about an
axis at a distance of 5.0 m. What is its velocity at
t= 10 s?
A rod 3.0 m in length is rotating at 2.0 rev/s
about an axis at one end. Compare the
Access for free at openstax.org
centripetal accelerations at radii of (a) 1.0 m, (b)
2.0 m, and (c) 3.0 m.
89. A particle located initially at
undergoes a displacement of
What is the final
position of the particle?
90. The position of a particle is given by
(a) What are
the particle’s velocity and acceleration as
functions of time? (b) What are the initial
conditions to produce the motion?
91. A spaceship is traveling at a constant velocity of
when its rockets fire, giving it
an acceleration of
What is its velocity s after the rockets fire?
92. A crossbow is aimed horizontally at a target 40
m away. The arrow hits 30 cm below the spot at
which it was aimed. What is the initial velocity of
the arrow?
93. A long jumper can jump a distance of 8.0 m
when he takes off at an angle of with respect
to the horizontal. Assuming he can jump with the
same initial speed at all angles, how much
distance does he lose by taking off at
Challenge Problems
99. World’s Longest Par 3. The tee of the world’s
longest par 3 sits atop South Africa’s Hanglip
Mountain at 400.0 m above the green and can
only be reached by helicopter. The horizontal
distance to the green is 359.0 m. Neglect air
resistance and answer the following questions.
(a) If a golfer launches a shot that is with
respect to the horizontal, what initial velocity
must she give the ball? (b) What is the time to
reach the green?
100. When a field goal kicker kicks a football as hard as
he can at to the horizontal, the ball just clears
the 3-m-high crossbar of the goalposts 45.7 m
away. (a) What is the maximum speed the kicker can
impart to the football? (b) In addition to clearing the
crossbar, the football must be high enough in the air
early during its flight to clear the reach of the
onrushing defensive lineman. If the lineman is 4.6 m
away and has a vertical reach of 2.5 m, can he block
the 45.7-m field goal attempt? (c) What if the
94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 101. 4 • Chapter Review 189
On planet Arcon, the maximum horizontal range
of a projectile launched at 10 m/s is 20 m. What
is the acceleration of gravity on this planet?
A mountain biker encounters a jump on a race
course that sends him into the air at to the
horizontal. If he lands at a horizontal distance of
45.0 m and 20 m below his launch point, what is
his initial speed?
Which has the greater centripetal acceleration, a
car with a speed of 15.0 m/s along a circular
track of radius 100.0 m or a car with a speed of
12.0 m/s along a circular track of radius 75.0 m?
A geosynchronous satellite orbits Earth at a
distance of 42,250.0 km and has a period of 1
day. What is the centripetal acceleration of the
satellite?
Two speedboats are traveling at the same speed
relative to the water in opposite directions in a
moving river. An observer on the riverbank sees
the boats moving at 4.0 m/s and 5.0 m/s. (a)
What is the speed of the boats relative to the
river? (b) How fast is the river moving relative to
the shore?
lineman is 1.0 m away?
A truck is traveling east at 80 km/h. At an
intersection 32 km ahead, a car is traveling north
at 50 km/h. (a) How long after this moment will
the vehicles be closest to each other? (b) How
far apart will they be at that point?
190 4 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 5
Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.1 The Golden Gate Bridge, one of the greatest works of modern engineering, was the longest suspension bridge in the world in
the year it opened, 1937. It is still among the longest suspension bridges. In designing and building a bridge, what physics must we
consider? What forces act on the bridge? What forces keep the bridge from falling? How do the towers, cables, and ground interact to
maintain stability?
CHAPTER OUTLINE
5.1 Forces
5.2 Newton's First Law
5.3 Newton's Second Law
5.4 Mass and Weight
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
5.6 Common Forces
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
INTRODUCTION
When you drive across a bridge, you expect it to remain stable. You also expect to speed up or
slow your car in response to traffic changes. In both cases, you deal with forces. The forces on the bridge are in
equilibrium, so it stays in place. In contrast, the force produced by your car engine causes a change in motion. Isaac
Newton discovered the laws of motion that describe these situations.
Forces affect every moment of your life. Your body is held to Earth by force and held together by the forces of
charged particles. When you open a door, walk down a street, lift your fork, or touch a baby’s face, you are applying
forces. Zooming in deeper, your body’s atoms are held together by electrical forces, and the core of the atom, called
the nucleus, is held together by the strongest force we know—strong nuclear force.
192 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
5.1 Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish between kinematics and dynamics
• Understand the definition of force
• Identify simple free-body diagrams
• Define the SI unit of force, the newton
• Describe force as a vector
The study of motion is called kinematics, but kinematics only describes the way objects move—their velocity and
their acceleration. Dynamics is the study of how forces affect the motion of objects and systems. It considers the
causes of motion of objects and systems of interest, where a system is anything being analyzed. The foundation of
dynamics are the laws of motion stated by Isaac Newton (1642–1727). These laws provide an example of the
breadth and simplicity of principles under which nature functions. They are also universal laws in that they apply to
situations on Earth and in space.
Newton’s laws of motion were just one part of the monumental work that has made him legendary (Figure 5.2). The
development of Newton’s laws marks the transition from the Renaissance to the modern era. Not until the advent of
modern physics was it discovered that Newton’s laws produce a good description of motion only when the objects
are moving at speeds much less than the speed of light and when those objects are larger than the size of most
molecules (about m in diameter). These constraints define the realm of Newtonian mechanics. At the
beginning of the twentieth century, Albert Einstein (1879–1955) developed the theory of relativity and, along with
many other scientists, quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics does not have the constraints present in
Newtonian physics. All of the situations we consider in this chapter, and all those preceding the introduction of
relativity in Relativity (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction), are in the
realm of Newtonian physics.
FIGURE 5.2 Isaac Newton (1642–1727) published his amazing work, Philosophiae Naturalis P rincipia Mathematica, in 1687. It proposed
scientific laws that still apply today to describe the motion of objects (the laws of motion). Newton also discovered the law of gravity,
invented calculus, and made great contributions to the theories of light and color.
Working Definition of Force
Dynamics is the study of the forces that cause objects and systems to move. To understand this, we need a working
definition of force. An intuitive definition of force—that is, a push or a pull—is a good place to start. We know that a
push or a pull has both magnitude and direction (therefore, it is a vector quantity), so we can define force as the
push or pull on an object with a specific magnitude and direction. Force can be represented by vectors or expressed
Access for free at openstax.org
5.1 • Forces 193
as a multiple of a standard force.
The push or pull on an object can vary considerably in either magnitude or direction. For example, a cannon exerts a
strong force on a cannonball that is launched into the air. In contrast, Earth exerts only a tiny downward pull on a
flea. Our everyday experiences also give us a good idea of how multiple forces add. If two people push in different
directions on a third person, as illustrated in Figure 5.3, we might expect the total force to be in the direction shown.
Since force is a vector, it adds just like other vectors. Forces, like other vectors, are represented by arrows and can
be added using the familiar head-to-tail method or trigonometric methods. These ideas were developed in Vectors.
FIGURE 5.3 (a) An overhead view of two ice skaters pushing on a third skater. Forces are vectors and add like other vectors, so the total
force on the third skater is in the direction shown. (b) A free-body diagram representing the forces acting on the third skater.
Figure 5.3(b) is our first example of a free-body diagram, which is a sketch showing all external forces acting on an
object or system. The object or system is represented by a single isolated point (or free body), and only those forces
acting on it that originate outside of the object or system—that is, external forces—are shown. (These forces are the
only ones shown because only external forces acting on the free body affect its motion. We can ignore any internal
forces within the body.) The forces are represented by vectors extending outward from the free body.
Free-body diagrams are useful in analyzing forces acting on an object or system, and are employed extensively in
the study and application of Newton’s laws of motion. You will see them throughout this text and in all your studies
of physics. The following steps briefly explain how a free-body diagram is created; we examine this strategy in more
detail in Drawing Free-Body Diagrams.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
1. Draw the object under consideration. If you are treating the object as a particle, represent the object as a
point. Place this point at the origin of an xy-coordinate system.
2. Include all forces that act on the object, representing these forces as vectors. However, do not include the net
force on the object or the forces that the object exerts on its environment.
3. 4. Resolve all force vectors into x- and y-components.
Draw a separate free-body diagram for each object in the problem.
We illustrate this strategy with two examples of free-body diagrams (Figure 5.4). The terms used in this figure are
explained in more detail later in the chapter.
194 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.4 In these free-body diagrams, is the normal force, is the weight of the object, and is the friction.
The steps given here are sufficient to guide you in this important problem-solving strategy. The final section of this
chapter explains in more detail how to draw free-body diagrams when working with the ideas presented in this
chapter.
Development of the Force Concept
A quantitative definition of force can be based on some standard force, just as distance is measured in units relative
to a standard length. One possibility is to stretch a spring a certain fixed distance (Figure 5.5) and use the force it
exerts to pull itself back to its relaxed shape—called a rest oring f orce—as a standard. The magnitude of all other
forces can be considered as multiples of this standard unit of force. Many other possibilities exist for standard
forces. Some alternative definitions of force will be given later in this chapter.
FIGURE 5.5 The force exerted by a stretched spring can be used as a standard unit of force. (a) This spring has a length x when undistorted.
(b) When stretched a distance , the spring exerts a restoring force which is reproducible. (c) A spring scale is one device that
uses a spring to measure force. The force is exerted on whatever is attached to the hook. Here, this force has a magnitude of six
units of the force standard being employed.
Let’s analyze force more deeply. Suppose a physics student sits at a table, working diligently on his homework
(Figure 5.6). What external forces act on him? Can we determine the origin of these forces?
Access for free at openstax.org
5.1 • Forces 195
FIGURE 5.6 (a) The forces acting on the student are due to the chair, the table, the floor, and Earth’s gravitational attraction. (b) In solving a
problem involving the student, we may want to consider only the forces acting along the line running through his torso. A free-body diagram
for this situation is shown.
In most situations, forces are grouped into two categories: contact f orces and field f orces. As you might guess,
contact forces are due to direct physical contact between objects. For example, the student in Figure 5.6
experiences the contact forces , , and , which are exerted by the chair on his posterior, the floor on his feet, and
the table on his forearms, respectively. Field forces, however, act without the necessity of physical contact between
objects. They depend on the presence of a “field” in the region of space surrounding the body under consideration.
Since the student is in Earth’s gravitational field, he feels a gravitational force ; in other words, he has weight.
You can think of a field as a property of space that is detectable by the forces it exerts. Scientists think there are only
four fundamental force fields in nature. These are the gravitational, electromagnetic, strong nuclear, and weak fields
(we consider these four forces in nature later in this text). As noted for in Figure 5.6, the gravitational field is
responsible for the weight of a body. The forces of the electromagnetic field include those of static electricity and
magnetism; they are also responsible for the attraction among atoms in bulk matter. Both the strong nuclear and the
weak force fields are effective only over distances roughly equal to a length of scale no larger than an atomic
nucleus ( ). Their range is so small that neither field has influence in the macroscopic world of Newtonian
mechanics.
Contact forces are fundamentally electromagnetic. While the elbow of the student in Figure 5.6 is in contact with the
tabletop, the atomic charges in his skin interact electromagnetically with the charges in the surface of the table. The
net (total) result is the force . Similarly, when adhesive tape sticks to a piece of paper, the atoms of the tape are
intermingled with those of the paper to cause a net electromagnetic force between the two objects. However, in the
context of Newtonian mechanics, the electromagnetic origin of contact forces is not an important concern.
Vector Notation for Force
As previously discussed, force is a vector; it has both magnitude and direction. The SI unit of force is called the
newton (abbreviated N), and 1 N is the force needed to accelerate an object with a mass of 1 kg at a rate of :
An easy way to remember the size of a newton is to imagine holding a small apple; it has a
weight of about 1 N.
We can thus describe a two-dimensional force in the form (the unit vectors indicate the
direction of these forces along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively) and a three-dimensional force in the form
In Figure 5.3, let’s suppose that ice skater 1, on the left side of the figure, pushes horizontally
196 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
with a force of 30.0 N to the right; we represent this as Similarly, if ice skater 2 pushes with a force of
40.0 N in the positive vertical direction shown, we would write The resultant of the two forces
causes a mass to accelerate—in this case, the third ice skater. This resultant is called the net external force
and is found by taking the vector sum of all external forces acting on an object or system (thus, we can also
represent net external force as ):
5.1
This equation can be extended to any number of forces.
In this example, we have . The hypotenuse of the triangle shown in
Figure 5.3 is the resultant force, or net force. It is a vector. To find its magnitude (the size of the vector, without
regard to direction), we use the rule given in Vectors, taking the square root of the sum of the squares of the
components:
The direction is given by
measured from the positive x-axis, as shown in the free-body diagram in Figure 5.3(b).
Let’s suppose the ice skaters now push the third ice skater with and . What
is the resultant of these two forces? We must recognize that force is a vector; therefore, we must add using the rules
for vector addition:
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.1
Find the magnitude and direction of the net force in the ice skater example just given.
INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation below to learn how to add vectors. Drag vectors onto a graph, change their length and
angle, and sum them together. The magnitude, angle, and components of each vector can be displayed in several
formats.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/5-1-forces)
5.2 Newton's First Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe Newton's first law of motion
• Recognize friction as an external force
• Define inertia
• Identify inertial reference frames
• Calculate equilibrium for a system
Experience suggests that an object at rest remains at rest if left alone and that an object in motion tends to slow
down and stop unless some effort is made to keep it moving. However, Newton’s first law gives a deeper
explanation of this observation.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.2 • Newton's First Law 197
NEWTON’S FIRST LAW OF MOTION
A body at rest remains at rest or, if in motion, remains in motion at constant velocity unless acted on by a net
external force.
Note the repeated use of the verb “remains.” We can think of this law as preserving the status quo of motion. Also
note the expression “constant velocity;” this means that the object maintains a path along a straight line, since
neither the magnitude nor the direction of the velocity vector changes. We can use Figure 5.7 to consider the two
parts of Newton’s first law.
FIGURE 5.7 (a) A hockey puck is shown at rest; it remains at rest until an outside force such as a hockey stick changes its state of rest; (b) a
hockey puck is shown in motion; it continues in motion in a straight line until an outside force causes it to change its state of motion.
Although it is slick, an ice surface provides some friction that slows the puck.
Rather than contradicting our experience, Newton’s first law says that there must be a cause for any change in
velocity (a change in either magnitude or direction) to occur. This cause is a net external force, which we defined
earlier in the chapter. An object sliding across a table or floor slows down due to the net force of friction acting on
the object. If friction disappears, will the object still slow down?
The idea of cause and effect is crucial in accurately describing what happens in various situations. For example,
consider what happens to an object sliding along a rough horizontal surface. The object quickly grinds to a halt. If we
spray the surface with talcum powder to make the surface smoother, the object slides farther. If we make the
surface even smoother by rubbing lubricating oil on it, the object slides farther yet. Extrapolating to a frictionless
surface and ignoring air resistance, we can imagine the object sliding in a straight line indefinitely. Friction is thus the
cause of slowing (consistent with Newton’s first law). The object would not slow down if friction were eliminated.
Consider an air hockey table (Figure 5.8). When the air is turned off, the puck slides only a short distance before
friction slows it to a stop. However, when the air is turned on, it creates a nearly frictionless surface, and the puck
glides long distances without slowing down. Additionally, if we know enough about the friction, we can accurately
predict how quickly the object slows down.
FIGURE 5.8 An air hockey table is useful in illustrating Newton’s laws. When the air is off, friction quickly slows the puck; but when the air is
on, it minimizes contact between the puck and the hockey table, and the puck glides far down the table.
198 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
Newton’s first law is general and can be applied to anything from an object sliding on a table to a satellite in orbit to
blood pumped from the heart. Experiments have verified that any change in velocity (speed or direction) must be
caused by an external force. The idea of g eneral l y applicable or universal laws is important—it is a basic feature of all
laws of physics. Identifying these laws is like recognizing patterns in nature from which further patterns can be
discovered. The genius of Galileo, who first developed the idea for the first law of motion, and Newton, who clarified
it, was to ask the fundamental question: “What is the cause?” Thinking in terms of cause and effect is fundamentally
different from the typical ancient Greek approach, when questions such as “Why does a tiger have stripes?” would
have been answered in Aristotelian fashion, such as “That is the nature of the beast.” The ability to think in terms of
cause and effect is the ability to make a connection between an observed behavior and the surrounding world.
Gravitation and Inertia
Regardless of the scale of an object, whether a molecule or a subatomic particle, two properties remain valid and
thus of interest to physics: gravitation and inertia. Both are connected to mass. Roughly speaking, mass is a
measure of the amount of matter in something. Gravitation is the attraction of one mass to another, such as the
attraction between yourself and Earth that holds your feet to the floor. The magnitude of this attraction is your
weight, and it is a force.
Mass is also related to inertia, the ability of an object to resist changes in its motion—in other words, to resist
acceleration. Newton’s first law is often called the law of inertia. As we know from experience, some objects have
more inertia than others. It is more difficult to change the motion of a large boulder than that of a basketball, for
example, because the boulder has more mass than the basketball. In other words, the inertia of an object is
measured by its mass. The relationship between mass and weight is explored later in this chapter.
Inertial Reference Frames
Earlier, we stated Newton’s first law as “A body at rest remains at rest or, if in motion, remains in motion at constant
velocity unless acted on by a net external force.” It can also be stated as “Every body remains in its state of uniform
motion in a straight line unless it is compelled to change that state by forces acting on it.” To Newton, “uniform
motion in a straight line” meant constant velocity, which includes the case of zero velocity, or rest. Therefore, the
first law says that the velocity of an object remains constant if the net force on it is zero.
Newton’s first law is usually considered to be a statement about reference frames. It provides a method for
identifying a special type of reference frame: the inertial reference frame. In principle, we can make the net force
on a body zero. If its velocity relative to a given frame is constant, then that frame is said to be inertial. So by
definition, an inertial reference frame is a reference frame in which Newton’s first law is valid. Newton’s first law
applies to objects with constant velocity. From this fact, we can infer the following statement.
INERTIAL REFERENCE FRAME
A reference frame moving at constant velocity relative to an inertial frame is also inertial. A reference frame
accelerating relative to an inertial frame is not inertial.
Are inertial frames common in nature? It turns out that well within experimental error, a reference frame at rest
relative to the most distant, or “fixed,” stars is inertial. All frames moving uniformly with respect to this fixed-star
frame are also inertial. For example, a nonrotating reference frame attached to the Sun is, for all practical purposes,
inertial, because its velocity relative to the fixed stars does not vary by more than one part in Earth
accelerates relative to the fixed stars because it rotates on its axis and revolves around the Sun; hence, a reference
frame attached to its surface is not inertial. For most problems, however, such a frame serves as a sufficiently
accurate approximation to an inertial frame, because the acceleration of a point on Earth’s surface relative to the
fixed stars is rather small ( ). Thus, unless indicated otherwise, we consider reference frames
fixed on Earth to be inertial.
Finally, no particular inertial frame is more special than any other. As far as the laws of nature are concerned, all
inertial frames are equivalent. In analyzing a problem, we choose one inertial frame over another simply on the
basis of convenience.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.2 • Newton's First Law 199
Newton’s First Law and Equilibrium
Newton’s first law tells us about the equilibrium of a system, which is the state in which the forces on the system are
balanced. Returning to Forces and the ice skaters in Figure 5.3, we know that the forces and combine to form
a resultant force, or the net external force: To create equilibrium, we require a balancing
force that will produce a net force of zero. This force must be equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to
which means the vector must be Referring to the ice skaters, for which we found to be ,
we can determine the balancing force by simply finding See the free-body diagram in
Figure 5.3(b).
We can give Newton’s first law in vector form:
5.2
This equation says that a net force of zero implies that the velocity can indicate zero velocity.)
of the object is constant. (The word “constant”
Newton’s first law is deceptively simple. If a car is at rest, the only forces acting on the car are weight and the
contact force of the pavement pushing up on the car (Figure 5.9). It is easy to understand that a nonzero net force is
required to change the state of motion of the car. As a car moves with constant velocity, the friction force propels the
car forward and opposes the drag force against it.
FIGURE 5.9 A car is shown (a) parked and (b) moving at constant velocity. How do Newton’s laws apply to the parked car? What does the
knowledge that the car is moving at constant velocity tell us about the net horizontal force on the car?
EXAMPLE 5.1
When Does Newton’s First Law Apply to Your Car?
Newton’s laws can be applied to all physical processes involving force and motion, including something as mundane
as driving a car.
(a) Your car is parked outside your house. Does Newton’s first law apply in this situation? Why or why not?
(b) Your car moves at constant velocity down the street. Does Newton’s first law apply in this situation? Why or why
not?
Strategy
In (a), we are considering the first part of Newton’s first law, dealing with a body at rest; in (b), we look at the second
part of Newton’s first law for a body in motion.
Solution
a. When your car is parked, all forces on the car must be balanced; the vector sum is 0 N. Thus, the net force is
zero, and Newton’s first law applies. The acceleration of the car is zero, and in this case, the velocity is also
zero.
b. When your car is moving at constant velocity down the street, the net force must also be zero according to
Newton’s first law. The car’s frictional force between the road and tires opposes the drag force on the car with
the same magnitude, producing a net force of zero. The body continues in its state of constant velocity until
200 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
the net force becomes nonzero. Realize that a net f orce of zero means that an object is either at rest or moving
with constant velocity , that is , it is not accelerating. What do you suppose happens when the car accelerates?
We explore this idea in the next section.
Significance
As this example shows, there are two kinds of equilibrium. In (a), the car is at rest; we say it is in static equilibrium.
In (b), the forces on the car are balanced, but the car is moving; we say that it is in dynamic equilibrium. (We
examine this idea in more detail in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity.) Again, it is possible for two (or more) forces to
act on an object yet for the object to move. In addition, a net force of zero cannot produce acceleration.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.2
A skydiver opens their parachute, and shortly thereafter, they are moving at constant velocity. (a) What forces are
acting on them? (b) Which force is bigger?
INTERACTIVE
Engage the simulation below to predict, qualitatively, how an external force will affect the speed and direction of an
object’s motion. Explain the effects with the help of a free-body diagram. Use free-body diagrams to draw position,
velocity, acceleration, and force graphs, and vice versa. Explain how the graphs relate to one another. Given a
scenario or a graph, sketch all four graphs.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/5-2-newtons-first-law)
5.3 Newton's Second Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish between external and internal forces
• Describe Newton's second law of motion
• Explain the dependence of acceleration on net force and mass
Newton’s second law is closely related to his first law. It mathematically gives the cause-and-effect relationship
between force and changes in motion. Newton’s second law is quantitative and is used extensively to calculate what
happens in situations involving a force. Before we can write down Newton’s second law as a simple equation that
gives the exact relationship of force, mass, and acceleration, we need to sharpen some ideas we mentioned earlier.
Force and Acceleration
First, what do we mean by a change in motion? The answer is that a change in motion is equivalent to a change in
velocity. A change in velocity means, by definition, that there is acceleration. Newton’s first law says that a net
external force causes a change in motion; thus, we see that a net ext ernal f orce causes nonzero acceleration.
We defined external force in Forces as force acting on an object or system that originates outside of the object or
system. Let’s consider this concept further. An intuitive notion of ext ernalis correct—it is outside the system of
interest. For example, in Figure 5.10(a), the system of interest is the car plus the person within it. The two forces
exerted by the two students are external forces. In contrast, an internal force acts between elements of the system.
Thus, the force the person in the car exerts to hang on to the steering wheel is an internal force between elements of
the system of interest. Only external forces affect the motion of a system, according to Newton’s first law. (The
internal forces cancel each other out, as explained in the next section.) Therefore, we must define the boundaries of
the system before we can determine which forces are external. Sometimes, the system is obvious, whereas at other
times, identifying the boundaries of a system is more subtle. The concept of a system is fundamental to many areas
of physics, as is the correct application of Newton’s laws. This concept is revisited many times in the study of
physics.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 • Newton's Second Law 201
FIGURE 5.10 Different forces exerted on the same mass produce different accelerations. (a) Two students push a stalled car. All external
forces acting on the car are shown. (b) The forces acting on the car are transferred to a coordinate plane (free-body diagram) for simpler
analysis. (c) The tow truck can produce greater external force on the same mass, and thus greater acceleration.
From this example, you can see that different forces exerted on the same mass produce different accelerations. In
Figure 5.10(a), the two students push a car with a driver in it. Arrows representing all external forces are shown. The
system of interest is the car and its driver. The weight of the system and the support of the ground are also
shown for completeness and are assumed to cancel (because there was no vertical motion and no imbalance of
forces in the vertical direction to create a change in motion). The vector represents the friction acting on the car,
and it acts to the left, opposing the motion of the car. (We discuss friction in more detail in the next chapter.) In
Figure 5.10(b), all external forces acting on the system add together to produce the net force The free-body
diagram shows all of the forces acting on the system of interest. The dot represents the center of mass of the
system. Each force vector extends from this dot. Because there are two forces acting to the right, the vectors are
shown collinearly. Finally, in Figure 5.10(c), a larger net external force produces a larger acceleration when
the tow truck pulls the car.
It seems reasonable that acceleration would be directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net external
force acting on a system. This assumption has been verified experimentally and is illustrated in Figure 5.10. To
obtain an equation for Newton’s second law, we first write the relationship of acceleration and net external force
as the proportionality
202 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
where the symbol means “proportional to.” (Recall from Forces that the net external force is the vector sum of all
external forces and is sometimes indicated as ) This proportionality shows what we have said in
words—acceleration is directly proportional to net external force. Once the system of interest is chosen, identify the
external forces and ignore the internal ones. It is a tremendous simplification to disregard the numerous internal
forces acting between objects within the system, such as muscular forces within the students’ bodies, let alone the
myriad forces between the atoms in the objects. Still, this simplification helps us solve some complex problems.
It also seems reasonable that acceleration should be inversely proportional to the mass of the system. In other
words, the larger the mass (the inertia), the smaller the acceleration produced by a given force. As illustrated in
Figure 5.11, the same net external force applied to a basketball produces a much smaller acceleration when it is
applied to an SUV. The proportionality is written as
where m is the mass of the system and a is the magnitude of the acceleration. Experiments have shown that
acceleration is exactly inversely proportional to mass, just as it is directly proportional to net external force.
FIGURE 5.11 The same force exerted on systems of different masses produces different accelerations. (a) A basketball player pushes on a
basketball to make a pass. (Ignore the effect of gravity on the ball.) (b) The same player exerts an identical force on a stalled SUV and
produces far less acceleration. (c) The free-body diagrams are identical, permitting direct comparison of the two situations. A series of
patterns for free-body diagrams will emerge as you do more problems and learn how to draw them in Drawing Free-Body Diagrams.
It has been found that the acceleration of an object depends only on the net external force and the mass of the
object. Combining the two proportionalities just given yields Newton’s second law.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION
The acceleration of a system is directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net external force acting
on the system and is inversely proportional to its mass. In equation form, Newton’s second law is
where form
is the acceleration, is the net force, and m is the mass. This is often written in the more familiar
Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 • Newton's Second Law 203
5.3
but the first equation gives more insight into what Newton’s second law means. When only the magnitude of
force and acceleration are considered, this equation can be written in the simpler scalar form:
5.4
The law is a cause-and-effect relationship among three quantities that is not simply based on their definitions. The
validity of the second law is based on experimental verification. The free-body diagram, which you will learn to draw
in Drawing Free-Body Diagrams, is the basis for writing Newton’s second law.
EXAMPLE 5.2
What Acceleration Can a Person Produce When Pushing a Lawn Mower?
Suppose that the net external force (push minus friction) exerted on a lawn mower is 51 N (about 11 lb.) parallel to
the ground (Figure 5.12). The mass of the mower is 24 kg. What is its acceleration?
FIGURE 5.12 (a) The net force on a lawn mower is 51 N to the right. At what rate does the lawn mower accelerate to the right? (b) The free-
body diagram for this problem is shown.
Strategy
This problem involves only motion in the horizontal direction; we are also given the net force, indicated by the single
vector, but we can suppress the vector nature and concentrate on applying Newton’s second law. Since and m
are given, the acceleration can be calculated directly from Newton’s second law as
Solution
The magnitude of the acceleration a is . Entering known values gives
Substituting the unit of kilograms times meters per square second for newtons yields
Significance
The direction of the acceleration is the same direction as that of the net force, which is parallel to the ground. This is
a result of the vector relationship expressed in Newton’s second law, that is, the vector representing net force is the
scalar multiple of the acceleration vector. There is no information given in this example about the individual external
forces acting on the system, but we can say something about their relative magnitudes. For example, the force
exerted by the person pushing the mower must be greater than the friction opposing the motion (since we know the
mower moved forward), and the vertical forces must cancel because no acceleration occurs in the vertical direction
204 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
(the mower is moving only horizontally). The acceleration found is small enough to be reasonable for a person
pushing a mower. Such an effort would not last too long, because the person’s top speed would soon be reached.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.3
At the time of its launch, the HMS Titanic was the most massive mobile object ever built, with a mass of
. If a force of 6 MN was applied to the ship, what acceleration would it experience?
In the preceding example, we dealt with net force only for simplicity. However, several forces act on the lawn
mower. The weight (discussed in detail in Mass and Weight) pulls down on the mower, toward the center of Earth;
this produces a contact force on the ground. The ground must exert an upward force on the lawn mower, known as
the normal force , which we define in Common Forces. These forces are balanced and therefore do not produce
vertical acceleration. In the next example, we show both of these forces. As you continue to solve problems using
Newton’s second law, be sure to show multiple forces.
EXAMPLE 5.3
Which Force Is Bigger?
(a) The car shown in Figure 5.13 is moving at a constant speed. Which force is bigger, (b) The same car is now accelerating to the right. Which force is bigger, or or Explain.
? Explain.
FIGURE 5.13 A car is shown (a) moving at constant speed and (b) accelerating. How do the forces acting on the car compare in each case?
(a) What does the knowledge that the car is moving at constant velocity tell us about the net horizontal force on the car compared to the
friction force? (b) What does the knowledge that the car is accelerating tell us about the horizontal force on the car compared to the friction
force?
Strategy
We must consider Newton’s first and second laws to analyze the situation. We need to decide which law applies;
this, in turn, will tell us about the relationship between the forces.
Solution
a. b. The forces are equal. According to Newton’s first law, if the net force is zero, the velocity is constant.
must be larger than According to Newton’s second law, a net force is required to
In this case, cause acceleration.
Significance
These questions may seem trivial, but they are commonly answered incorrectly. For a car or any other object to
Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 • Newton's Second Law 205
move, it must be accelerated from rest to the desired speed; this requires that the friction force be greater than the
drag force. Once the car is moving at constant velocity, the net force must be zero; otherwise, the car will accelerate
(gain speed). To solve problems involving Newton’s laws, we must understand whether to apply Newton’s first law
(where ) or Newton’s second law (where is not zero). This will be apparent as you see more
examples and attempt to solve problems on your own.
EXAMPLE 5.4
What Rocket Thrust Accelerates This Sled?
Before space flights carrying astronauts, rocket sleds were used to test aircraft, missile equipment, and
physiological effects on human subjects at high speeds. They consisted of a platform that was mounted on one or
two rails and propelled by several rockets.
Calculate the magnitude of force exerted by each rocket, called its thrust T , for the four-rocket propulsion system
shown in Figure 5.14. The sled’s initial acceleration is , the mass of the system is 2100 kg, and the force of
friction opposing the motion is 650 N.
FIGURE 5.14 A sled experiences a rocket thrust that accelerates it to the right. Each rocket creates an identical thrust T . The system here is
the sled, its rockets, and its rider, so none of the forces between these objects are considered. The arrow representing friction is drawn
larger than scale.
Strategy
Although forces are acting both vertically and horizontally, we assume the vertical forces cancel because there is no
vertical acceleration. This leaves us with only horizontal forces and a simpler one-dimensional problem. Directions
are indicated with plus or minus signs, with right taken as the positive direction. See the free-body diagram in Figure
5.14.
Solution
Since acceleration, mass, and the force of friction are given, we start with Newton’s second law and look for ways to
find the thrust of the engines. We have defined the direction of the force and acceleration as acting “to the right,” so
we need to consider only the magnitudes of these quantities in the calculations. Hence we begin with
206 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
where is the net force along the horizontal direction. We can see from the figure that the engine thrusts add,
whereas friction opposes the thrust. In equation form, the net external force is
Substituting this into Newton’s second law gives us
Using a little algebra, we solve for the total thrust 4T :
Substituting known values yields
Therefore, the total thrust is
and the individual thrusts are
Significance
The numbers are quite large, so the result might surprise you. Experiments such as this were performed in the early
1960s to test the limits of human endurance, and the setup was designed to protect human subjects in jet fighter
emergency ejections. Speeds of 1000 km/h were obtained, with accelerations of 45 g’s. (Recall that g, acceleration
due to gravity, is . When we say that acceleration is 45 g’s, it is which is approximately
.) Although living subjects are not used anymore, land speeds of 10,000 km/h have been obtained with a
rocket sled.
In this example, as in the preceding one, the system of interest is obvious. We see in later examples that choosing
the system of interest is crucial—and the choice is not always obvious.
Newton’s second law is more than a definition; it is a relationship among acceleration, force, and mass. It can help
us make predictions. Each of those physical quantities can be defined independently, so the second law tells us
something basic and universal about nature.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.4
A 550-kg sports car collides with a 2200-kg truck, and during the collision, the net force on each vehicle is the force
exerted by the other. If the magnitude of the truck’s acceleration is what is the magnitude of the sports
car’s acceleration?
Component Form of Newton’s Second Law
We have developed Newton’s second law and presented it as a vector equation in Equation 5.3. This vector equation
can be written as three component equations:
5.5
The second law is a description of how a body responds mechanically to its environment. The influence of the
environment is the net force the body’s response is the acceleration and the strength of the response is
inversely proportional to the mass m. The larger the mass of an object, the smaller its response (its acceleration) to
the influence of the environment (a given net force). Therefore, a body’s mass is a measure of its inertia, as we
explained in Newton’s First Law.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 • Newton's Second Law 207
EXAMPLE 5.5
Force on a Soccer Ball
A 0.400-kg soccer ball is kicked across the field by a player; it undergoes acceleration given by
Find (a) the resultant force acting on the ball and (b) the magnitude and direction of the
resultant force.
Strategy
The vectors in and format, which indicate force direction along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively, are
involved, so we apply Newton’s second law in vector form.
Solution
a. We apply Newton’s second law:
b. Magnitude and direction are found using the components of :
Significance
We must remember that Newton’s second law is a vector equation. In (a), we are multiplying a vector by a scalar to
determine the net force in vector form. While the vector form gives a compact representation of the force vector, it
does not tell us how “big” it is, or where it goes, in intuitive terms. In (b), we are determining the actual size
(magnitude) of this force and the direction in which it travels.
EXAMPLE 5.6
Mass of a Car
Find the mass of a car if a net force of Strategy
Vector division is not defined, so scalar form of Newton’s second law, .
Solution
produces an acceleration of .
cannot be performed. However, mass m is a scalar, so we can use the
We use and substitute the magnitudes of the two vectors: and Therefore,
Significance
Force and acceleration were given in the and form.
and format, but the answer, mass m, is a scalar and thus is not given in
EXAMPLE 5.7
Several Forces on a Particle
A particle of mass is acted upon by four forces of magnitudes.
Figure 5.15. What is the acceleration of the particle?
, with the directions as shown in the free-body diagram in
208 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.15 Four forces in the xy-plane are applied to a 4.0-kg particle.
Strategy
Because this is a two-dimensional problem, we must use a free-body diagram. First, and y-components. We can then apply the second law in each direction.
must be resolved into x-
Solution
We draw a free-body diagram as shown in Figure 5.15. Now we apply Newton’s second law. We consider all vectors
resolved into x- and y-components:
Thus, the net acceleration is
which is a vector of magnitude directed at to the positive x-axis.
Significance
Numerous examples in everyday life can be found that involve three or more forces acting on a single object, such as
cables running from the Golden Gate Bridge or a football player being tackled by three defenders. We can see that
the solution of this example is just an extension of what we have already done.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.5
A car has forces acting on it, as shown below. The mass of the car is 1000.0 kg. The road is slick, so friction can be
ignored. (a) What is the net force on the car? (b) What is the acceleration of the car?
Access for free at openstax.org
5.3 • Newton's Second Law 209
Newton’s Second Law and Momentum
Newton actually stated his second law in terms of momentum: “The instantaneous rate at which a body’s
momentum changes is equal to the net force acting on the body.” (“Instantaneous rate” implies that the derivative is
involved.) This can be given by the vector equation
5.6
This means that Newton’s second law addresses the central question of motion: What causes a change in motion of
an object? Momentum was described by Newton as “quantity of motion,” a way of combining both the velocity of an
object and its mass. We devote Linear Momentum and Collisions to the study of momentum.
For now, it is sufficient to define momentum as the product of the mass of the object m and its velocity :
5.7
Since velocity is a vector, so is momentum.
It is easy to visualize momentum. A train moving at 10 m/s has more momentum than one that moves at 2 m/s. In
everyday life, we speak of one sports team as “having momentum” when they score points against the opposing
team.
If we substitute Equation 5.7 into Equation 5.6, we obtain
When m is constant, we have
Thus, we see that the momentum form of Newton’s second law reduces to the form given earlier in this section.
INTERACTIVE
Explore the forces at work (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21forcesatwork) when pulling a cart (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21pullacart) or pushing a refrigerator, crate, or person. Put an object on a ramp (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ramp) and
see how it affects its motion. Engage the simulation below and see how applied forces make objects move.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/5-3-newtons-second-
law)
210 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
5.4 Mass and Weight
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between mass and weight
• Explain why objects falling through the air are never truly in free fall
• Describe the concept of weightlessness
Mass and weight are often used interchangeably in everyday conversation. For example, our medical records often
show our weight in kilograms but never in the correct units of newtons. In physics, however, there is an important
distinction. Weight is the pull of Earth on an object. It depends on the distance from the center of Earth. Unlike
weight, mass does not vary with location. The mass of an object is the same on Earth, in orbit, or on the surface of
the Moon.
Units of Force
The equation unit of force is the newton. Since
is used to define net force in terms of mass, length, and time. As explained earlier, the SI
Although almost the entire world uses the newton for the unit of force, in the United States, the most familiar unit of
force is the pound (lb), where 1 N = 0.225 lb. Thus, a 225-lb person weighs 1000 N.
Weight and Gravitational Force
When an object is dropped, it accelerates toward the center of Earth. Newton’s second law says that a net force on
an object is responsible for its acceleration. If air resistance is negligible, the net force on a falling object is the
gravitational force, commonly called its weight , or its force due to gravity acting on an object of mass m. Weight
can be denoted as a vector because it has a direction; down is, by definition, the direction of gravity, and hence,
weight is a downward force. The magnitude of weight is denoted as w. Galileo was instrumental in showing that, in
the absence of air resistance, all objects fall with the same acceleration g. Using Galileo’s result and Newton’s
second law, we can derive an equation for weight.
Consider an object with mass m falling toward Earth. It experiences only the downward force of gravity, which is the
weight . Newton’s second law says that the magnitude of the net external force on an object is We
know that the acceleration of an object due to gravity is or . Substituting these into Newton’s second law
gives us the following equations.
WEIGHT
The gravitational force on a mass is its weight. We can write this in vector form, where mass, as
is weight and m is
5.8
In scalar form, we can write
5.9
Since on Earth, the weight of a 1.00-kg object on Earth is 9.80 N:
When the net external force on an object is its weight, we say that it is in free fall, that is, the only force acting on the
object is gravity. However, when objects on Earth fall downward through the air, they are never truly in free fall
because there is always some upward resistance force from the air acting on the object.
Acceleration due to gravity g varies slightly over the surface of Earth, so the weight of an object depends on its
location and is not an intrinsic property of the object. Weight varies dramatically if we leave Earth’s surface. On the
Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 • Mass and Weight 211
. A 1.0-kg mass thus has a weight of 9.8 N on Earth
Moon, for example, acceleration due to gravity is only and only about 1.6 N on the Moon.
The broadest definition of weight in this sense is that the weight of an object is the gravitational force on it from the
nearest large body, such as Earth, the Moon, or the Sun. This is the most common and useful definition of weight in
physics. It differs dramatically, however, from the definition of weight used by NASA and the popular media in
relation to space travel and exploration. When they speak of “weightlessness” and “microgravity,” they are referring
to the phenomenon we call “free fall” in physics. We use the preceding definition of weight, force due to gravity
acting on an object of mass m, and we make careful distinctions between free fall and actual weightlessness.
Be aware that weight and mass are different physical quantities, although they are closely related. Mass is an
intrinsic property of an object: It is a quantity of matter. The quantity or amount of matter of an object is determined
by the numbers of atoms and molecules of various types it contains. Because these numbers do not vary, in
Newtonian physics, mass does not vary; therefore, its response to an applied force does not vary. In contrast, weight
is the gravitational force acting on an object, so it does vary depending on gravity. For example, a person closer to
the center of Earth, at a low elevation such as New Orleans, weighs slightly more than a person who is located in the
higher elevation of Denver, even though they may have the same mass.
It is tempting to equate mass to weight, because most of our examples take place on Earth, where the weight of an
object varies only a little with the location of the object. In addition, it is difficult to count and identify all of the
atoms and molecules in an object, so mass is rarely determined in this manner. If we consider situations in which
is a constant on Earth, we see that weight is directly proportional to mass m, since that is, the more
massive an object is, the more it weighs. Operationally, the masses of objects are determined by comparison with
the standard kilogram, as we discussed in Units and Measurement. But by comparing an object on Earth with one on
the Moon, we can easily see a variation in weight but not in mass. For instance, on Earth, a 5.0-kg object weighs 49
N; on the Moon, where g is , the object weighs 8.4 N. However, the mass of the object is still 5.0 kg on the
Moon.
EXAMPLE 5.8
Clearing a Field
A farmer is lifting some moderately heavy rocks from a field to plant crops. He lifts a stone that weighs 40.0 lb.
(about 180 N). What force does he apply if the stone accelerates at a rate of
Strategy
We were given the weight of the stone, which we use in finding the net force on the stone. However, we also need to
know its mass to apply Newton’s second law, so we must apply the equation for weight, , to determine the
mass.
Solution
No forces act in the horizontal direction, so we can concentrate on vertical forces, as shown in the following free-
body diagram. We label the acceleration to the side; technically, it is not part of the free-body diagram, but it helps
to remind us that the object accelerates upward (so the net force is upward).
212 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
Significance
To apply Newton’s second law as the primary equation in solving a problem, we sometimes have to rely on other
equations, such as the one for weight or one of the kinematic equations, to complete the solution.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.6
For Example 5.8, find the acceleration when the farmer’s applied force is 230.0 N.
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Newton’s third law of motion
• Identify the action and reaction forces in different situations
• Apply Newton’s third law to define systems and solve problems of motion
We have thus far considered force as a push or a pull; however, if you think about it, you realize that no push or pull
ever occurs by itself. When you push on a wall, the wall pushes back on you. This brings us to Newton’s third law.
NEWTON’S THIRD LAW OF MOTION
Whenever one body exerts a force on a second body, the first body experiences a force that is equal in
magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that it exerts. Mathematically, if a body Aexerts a force body B , then Bsimultaneously exerts a force on A , or in vector equation form,
on
5.10
Newton’s third law represents a certain symmetry in nature: Forces always occur in pairs, and one body cannot exert
a force on another without experiencing a force itself. We sometimes refer to this law loosely as “action-reaction,”
where the force exerted is the action and the force experienced as a consequence is the reaction. Newton’s third law
has practical uses in analyzing the origin of forces and understanding which forces are external to a system.
We can readily see Newton’s third law at work by taking a look at how people move about. Consider a swimmer
pushing off the side of a pool (Figure 5.16). She pushes against the wall of the pool with her feet and accelerates in
the direction opposite that of her push. The wall has exerted an equal and opposite force on the swimmer. You might
think that two equal and opposite forces would cancel, but they do not because the y act on diff erent s yst ems. In
this case, there are two systems that we could investigate: the swimmer and the wall. If we select the swimmer to
be the system of interest, as in the figure, then is an external force on this system and affects its motion.
The swimmer moves in the direction of this force. In contrast, the force acts on the wall, not on our
system of interest. Thus, does not directly affect the motion of the system and does not cancel
The swimmer pushes in the direction opposite that in which she wishes to move. The reaction to her
push is thus in the desired direction. In a free-body diagram, such as the one shown in Figure 5.16, we never include
both forces of an action-reaction pair; in this case, we only use , not .
Access for free at openstax.org
5.5 • Newton’s Third Law 213
FIGURE 5.16 When the swimmer exerts a force on the wall, she accelerates in the opposite direction; in other words, the net external force
on her is in the direction opposite of This opposition occurs because, in accordance with Newton’s third law, the wall exerts a
force on the swimmer that is equal in magnitude but in the direction opposite to the one she exerts on it. The line around the
swimmer indicates the system of interest. Thus, the free-body diagram shows only w (the gravitational force), and BF , which is
the buoyant force of the water supporting the swimmer’s weight. The vertical forces w and BFcancel because there is no vertical
acceleration.
Other examples of Newton’s third law are easy to find:
• As a professor paces in front of a whiteboard, he exerts a force backward on the floor. The floor exerts a
reaction force forward on the professor that causes him to accelerate forward.
• A car accelerates forward because the ground pushes forward on the drive wheels, in reaction to the drive
wheels pushing backward on the ground. You can see evidence of the wheels pushing backward when tires
spin on a gravel road and throw the rocks backward.
• Rockets move forward by expelling gas backward at high velocity. This means the rocket exerts a large
backward force on the gas in the rocket combustion chamber; therefore, the gas exerts a large reaction force
forward on the rocket. This reaction force, which pushes a body forward in response to a backward force, is
called thrust. It is a common misconception that rockets propel themselves by pushing on the ground or on
the air behind them. They actually work better in a vacuum, where they can more readily expel the exhaust
gases.
• Helicopters create lift by pushing air down, thereby experiencing an upward reaction force.
• Birds and airplanes also fly by exerting force on the air in a direction opposite that of whatever force they
need. For example, the wings of a bird force air downward and backward to get lift and move forward.
• An octopus propels itself in the water by ejecting water through a funnel from its body, similar to a jet ski.
• When a person pulls down on a vertical rope, the rope pulls up on the person (Figure 5.17).
FIGURE 5.17 When the mountain climber pulls down on the rope, the rope pulls up on the mountain climber. (credit left: modification of
work by Cristian Bortes)
214 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
There are two important features of Newton’s third law. First, the forces exerted (the action and reaction) are always
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. Second, these forces are acting on different bodies or systems: A ’s
force acts on Band B ’s force acts on A . In other words, the two forces are distinct forces that do not act on the same
body. Thus, they do not cancel each other.
For the situation shown in Figure 5.6, the third law indicates that because the chair is pushing upward on the boy
with force and he is pushing downward on the chair with force Similarly, he is pushing downward with forces
on the floor and table, respectively. Finally, since Earth pulls downward on the boy with force he pulls
upward on Earth with force . If that student were to angrily pound the table in frustration, he would quickly learn
the painful lesson (avoidable by studying Newton’s laws) that the table hits back just as hard.
A person who is walking or running applies Newton’s third law instinctively. For example, the runner in Figure 5.18
pushes backward on the ground so that it pushes him forward.
FIGURE 5.18 The runner experiences Newton’s third law. (a) A force is exerted by the runner on the ground. (b) The reaction force of the
ground on the runner pushes him forward. (credit "runner": modification of work by "Greenwich Photography"/Flickr)
EXAMPLE 5.9
Forces on a Stationary Object
The package in Figure 5.19 is sitting on a scale. For the scale and package at rest (i.e., not accelerating), show that
the scale indicates the weight of the package.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.5 • Newton’s Third Law 215
FIGURE 5.19 (a) The forces on a package sitting on a scale, along with their reaction forces. The force is the weight of the package (the
force due to Earth’s gravity) and is the force of the scale on the package. (b) Isolation of the package-scale system and the package-Earth
system makes the action and reaction pairs clear.
Strategy
The forces on the package are reaction forces that the package exerts are accelerating, application of the second law yields
which is due to the scale, and on the scale and which is due to Earth’s gravitational field. The
on Earth. Because the package is not
so
The scale reading indicates the magnitude of the force Significance
The scale actually does not measure the weight of the package; it measures the force system is accelerating, and would not be equal, as explained in Applications of Newton’s Laws.
, which is equal to the magnitude of the package’s weight.
on its surface. If the
EXAMPLE 5.10
Getting Up to Speed: Choosing the Correct System
A physics professor pushes a cart of demonstration equipment to a lecture hall (Figure 5.20). Her mass is 65.0 kg,
the cart’s mass is 12.0 kg, and the equipment’s mass is 7.0 kg. Calculate the acceleration produced when the
professor exerts a backward force of 150 N on the floor. All forces opposing the motion, such as friction on the cart’s
wheels and air resistance, total 24.0 N.
216 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.20 A professor pushes the cart with her demonstration equipment. The lengths of the arrows are proportional to the magnitudes
of the forces (except for because it is too small to be drawn to scale). System 1 is appropriate for this example, because it asks for the
acceleration of the entire group of objects. Only and are external forces acting on System 1 along the line of motion. All other forces
either cancel or act on the outside world. System 2 is chosen for the next example so that is an external force and enters into
Newton’s second law. The free-body diagrams, which serve as the basis for Newton’s second law, vary with the system chosen.
Strategy
Since they accelerate as a unit, we define the system to be the professor, cart, and equipment. This is System 1 in
Figure 5.20. The professor pushes backward with a force of 150 N. According to Newton’s third law, the floor
exerts a forward reaction force of 150 N on System 1. Because all motion is horizontal, we can assume there
is no net force in the vertical direction. Therefore, the problem is one-dimensional along the horizontal direction. As
noted, friction fopposes the motion and is thus in the opposite direction of We do not include the forces
or because these are internal forces, and we do not include because it acts on the floor, not on the
system. There are no other significant forces acting on System 1. If the net external force can be found from all this
information, we can use Newton’s second law to find the acceleration as requested. See the free-body diagram in
the figure.
Solution
Newton’s second law is given by
The net external force on System 1 is deduced from Figure 5.20 and the preceding discussion to be
The mass of System 1 is
These values of and m produce an acceleration of
Significance
None of the forces between components of System 1, such as between the professor’s hands and the cart,
contribute to the net external force because they are internal to System 1. Another way to look at this is that forces
Access for free at openstax.org
5.5 • Newton’s Third Law 217
between components of a system cancel because they are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. For
example, the force exerted by the professor on the cart results in an equal and opposite force back on the professor.
In this case, both forces act on the same system and therefore cancel. Thus, internal forces (between components
of a system) cancel. Choosing System 1 was crucial to solving this problem.
EXAMPLE 5.11
Force on the Cart: Choosing a New System
Calculate the force the professor exerts on the cart in Figure 5.20, using data from the previous example if needed.
Strategy
If we define the system of interest as the cart plus the equipment (System 2 in Figure 5.20), then the net external
force on System 2 is the force the professor exerts on the cart minus friction. The force she exerts on the cart, ,
is an external force acting on System 2. was internal to System 1, but it is external to System 2 and thus enters
Newton’s second law for this system.
Solution
Newton’s second law can be used to find We start with
The magnitude of the net external force on System 2 is
We solve for , the desired quantity:
The value of fis given, so we must calculate net of System 2 are known. Using Newton’s second law, we see that
That can be done because both the acceleration and the mass
where the mass of System 2 is 19.0 kg ( the previous example. Thus,
) and its acceleration was found to be in
Now we can find the desired force:
Significance
This force is significantly less than the 150-N force the professor exerted backward on the floor. Not all of that
150-N force is transmitted to the cart; some of it accelerates the professor. The choice of a system is an important
analytical step both in solving problems and in thoroughly understanding the physics of the situation (which are not
necessarily the same things).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.7
Two blocks are at rest and in contact on a frictionless surface as shown below, with and
applied force 24 N. (a) Find the acceleration of the system of blocks. (b) Suppose that the blocks are later separated.
What force will give the second block, with the mass of 6.0 kg, the same acceleration as the system of blocks?
218 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
INTERACTIVE
View this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21actionreact) to watch examples of action and reaction.
INTERACTIVE
View this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21NewtonsLaws) to watch examples of Newton’s laws and internal and
external forces.
5.6 Common Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define normal and tension forces
• Distinguish between real and fictitious forces
• Apply Newton’s laws of motion to solve problems involving a variety of forces
Forces are given many names, such as push, pull, thrust, and weight. Traditionally, forces have been grouped into
several categories and given names relating to their source, how they are transmitted, or their effects. Several of
these categories are discussed in this section, together with some interesting applications. Further examples of
forces are discussed later in this text.
A Catalog of Forces: Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces
A catalog of forces will be useful for reference as we solve various problems involving force and motion. These
forces include normal force, tension, friction, and spring force.
Normal force
Weight (also called the force of gravity) is a pervasive force that acts at all times and must be counteracted to keep
an object from falling. You must support the weight of a heavy object by pushing up on it when you hold it stationary,
as illustrated in Figure 5.21(a). But how do inanimate objects like a table support the weight of a mass placed on
them, such as shown in Figure 5.21(b)? When the bag of dog food is placed on the table, the table sags slightly
under the load. This would be noticeable if the load were placed on a card table, but even a sturdy oak table
deforms when a force is applied to it. Unless an object is deformed beyond its limit, it will exert a restoring force
much like a deformed spring (or a trampoline or diving board). The greater the deformation, the greater the restoring
force. Thus, when the load is placed on the table, the table sags until the restoring force becomes as large as the
weight of the load. At this point, the net external force on the load is zero. That is the situation when the load is
stationary on the table. The table sags quickly and the sag is slight, so we do not notice it. But it is similar to the
sagging of a trampoline when you climb onto it.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.6 • Common Forces 219
FIGURE 5.21 (a) The person holding the bag of dog food must supply an upward force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction
to the weight of the food so that it doesn’t drop to the ground. (b) The card table sags when the dog food is placed on it, much like a stiff
trampoline. Elastic restoring forces in the table grow as it sags until they supply a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to
the weight of the load.
We must conclude that whatever supports a load, be it animate or not, must supply an upward force equal to the
weight of the load, as we assumed in a few of the previous examples. If the force supporting the weight of an object,
or a load, is perpendicular to the surface of contact between the load and its support, this force is defined as a
normal force and here is given by the symbol (This is not the newton unit for force, or N.) The word normal
means perpendicular to a surface. This means that the normal force experienced by an object resting on a horizontal
surface can be expressed in vector form as follows:
In scalar form, this becomes
The normal force can be less than the object’s weight if the object is on an incline.
EXAMPLE 5.12
Weight on an Incline
Consider the skier on the slope in Figure 5.22. Her mass including equipment is 60.0 kg. (a) What is her acceleration
if friction is negligible? (b) What is her acceleration if friction is 45.0 N?
220 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.22 Since the acceleration is parallel to the slope and acting down the slope, it is most convenient to project all forces onto a
coordinate system where one axis is parallel to the slope and the other is perpendicular to it (axes shown to the left of the skier). is
perpendicular to the slope and is parallel to the slope, but has components along both axes, namely, and . Here, has a
squiggly line to show that it has been replaced by these components. The force is equal in magnitude to , so there is no acceleration
perpendicular to the slope, but fis less than , so there is a downslope acceleration (along the axis parallel to the slope).
Strategy
This is a two-dimensional problem, since not all forces on the skier (the system of interest) are parallel. The
approach we have used in two-dimensional kinematics also works well here. Choose a convenient coordinate
system and project the vectors onto its axes, creating two one-dimensional problems to solve. The most convenient
coordinate system for motion on an incline is one that has one coordinate parallel to the slope and one
perpendicular to the slope. (Motions along mutually perpendicular axes are independent.) We use x and y for the
parallel and perpendicular directions, respectively. This choice of axes simplifies this type of problem, because
there is no motion perpendicular to the slope and the acceleration is downslope. Regarding the forces, friction is
drawn in opposition to motion (friction always opposes forward motion) and is always parallel to the slope, is
drawn parallel to the slope and downslope (it causes the motion of the skier down the slope), and is drawn as
the component of weight perpendicular to the slope. Then, we can consider the separate problems of forces parallel
to the slope and forces perpendicular to the slope.
Solution
The magnitude of the component of weight parallel to the slope is
and the magnitude of the component of the weight perpendicular to the slope is
a. Neglect friction. Since the acceleration is parallel to the slope, we need only consider forces parallel to the slope.
(Forces perpendicular to the slope add to zero, since there is no acceleration in that direction.) The forces parallel to
the slope are the component of the skier’s weight parallel to slope and friction f . Using Newton’s second law,
with subscripts to denote quantities parallel to the slope,
where assuming no friction for this part. Therefore,
Access for free at openstax.org
5.6 • Common Forces 221
is the acceleration.
b. Include friction. We have a given value for friction, and we know its direction is parallel to the slope and it opposes
motion between surfaces in contact. So the net external force is
Substituting this into Newton’s second law, gives
We substitute known values to obtain
This gives us
which is the acceleration parallel to the incline when there is 45.0 N of opposing friction.
Significance
Since friction always opposes motion between surfaces, the acceleration is smaller when there is friction than when
there is none. It is a general result that if friction on an incline is negligible, then the acceleration down the incline is
, regardless of mass. As discussed previously, all objects fall with the same acceleration in the absence of
air resistance. Similarly, all objects, regardless of mass, slide down a frictionless incline with the same acceleration
(if the angle is the same).
When an object rests on an incline that makes an angle with the horizontal, the force of gravity acting on the object
is divided into two components: a force acting perpendicular to the plane, , and a force acting parallel to the
plane, (Figure 5.23). The normal force is typically equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the
perpendicular component of the weight . The force acting parallel to the plane, , causes the object to
accelerate down the incline.
FIGURE 5.23 An object rests on an incline that makes an angle with the horizontal.
Be careful when resolving the weight of the object into components. If the incline is at an angle then the magnitudes of the weight components are
to the horizontal,
222 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
and
We use the second equation to write the normal force experienced by an object resting on an inclined plane:
object at rest or sliding on an inclined plane. Instead of memorizing these equations, it is helpful to be able to
determine them from reason. To do this, we draw the right angle formed by the three weight vectors. The angle the incline is the same as the angle formed between w and . Knowing this property, we can use trigonometry to
determine the magnitude of the weight components:
of
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.8
A force of 1150 N acts parallel to a ramp to push a 250-kg gun safe into a moving van. The ramp is frictionless and
inclined at (a) What is the acceleration of the safe up the ramp? (b) If we consider friction in this problem, with
a friction force of 120 N, what is the acceleration of the safe?
Tension
A tension is a force along the length of a medium; in particular, it is a pulling force that acts along a stretched
flexible connector, such as a rope or cable. The word “tension” comes from a Latin word meaning “to stretch.” Not
coincidentally, the flexible cords that carry muscle forces to other parts of the body are called t endons.
Any flexible connector, such as a string, rope, chain, wire, or cable, can only exert a pull parallel to its length; thus, a
force carried by a flexible connector is a tension with a direction parallel to the connector. Tension is a pull in a
connector. Consider the phrase: “You can’t push a rope.” Instead, tension force pulls outward along the two ends of
a rope.
Consider a person holding a mass on a rope, as shown in Figure 5.24. If the 5.00-kg mass in the figure is stationary,
then its acceleration is zero and the net force is zero. The only external forces acting on the mass are its weight and
the tension supplied by the rope. Thus,
where Tand w are the magnitudes of the tension and weight, respectively, and their signs indicate direction, with up
being positive. As we proved using Newton’s second law, the tension equals the weight of the supported mass:
object hanging at rest. Thus, for a 5.00-kg mass (neglecting the mass of the rope), we see that
If we cut the rope and insert a spring, the spring would extend a length corresponding to a force of 49.0 N, providing
a direct observation and measure of the tension force in the rope.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.6 • Common Forces 223
FIGURE 5.24 When a perfectly flexible connector (one requiring no force to bend it) such as this rope transmits a force that force must
be parallel to the length of the rope, as shown. By Newton’s third law, the rope pulls with equal force but in opposite directions on the hand
and the supported mass (neglecting the weight of the rope). The rope is the medium that carries the equal and opposite forces between the
two objects. The tension anywhere in the rope between the hand and the mass is equal. Once you have determined the tension in one
location, you have determined the tension at all locations along the rope.
Flexible connectors are often used to transmit forces around corners, such as in a hospital traction system, a
tendon, or a bicycle brake cable. If there is no friction, the tension transmission is undiminished; only its direction
changes, and it is always parallel to the flexible connector, as shown in Figure 5.25.
FIGURE 5.25 (a) Tendons in the finger carry force Tfrom the muscles to other parts of the finger, usually changing the force’s direction but
not its magnitude (the tendons are relatively friction free). (b) The brake cable on a bicycle carries the tension Tfrom the brake lever on the
handlebars to the brake mechanism. Again, the direction but not the magnitude of Tis changed.
EXAMPLE 5.13
What Is the Tension in a Tightrope?
Calculate the tension in the wire supporting the 70.0-kg tightrope walker shown in Figure 5.26.
224 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE 5.26 The weight of a tightrope walker causes a wire to sag by . The system of interest is the point in the wire at which the
tightrope walker is standing.
Strategy
As you can see in Figure 5.26, the wire is bent under the person’s weight. Thus, the tension on either side of the
person has an upward component that can support his weight. As usual, forces are vectors represented pictorially
by arrows that have the same direction as the forces and lengths proportional to their magnitudes. The system is the
tightrope walker, and the only external forces acting on him are his weight and the two tensions (left tension)
and (right tension). It is reasonable to neglect the weight of the wire. The net external force is zero, because the
system is static. We can use trigonometry to find the tensions. One conclusion is possible at the outset—we can see
from Figure 5.26(b) that the magnitudes of the tensions and must be equal. We know this because there is
no horizontal acceleration in the rope and the only forces acting to the left and right are and . Thus, the
magnitude of those horizontal components of the forces must be equal so that they cancel each other out.
Whenever we have two-dimensional vector problems in which no two vectors are parallel, the easiest method of
solution is to pick a convenient coordinate system and project the vectors onto its axes. In this case, the best
coordinate system has one horizontal axis (x) and one vertical axis (y).
Solution
First, we need to resolve the tension vectors into their horizontal and vertical components. It helps to look at a new
free-body diagram showing all horizontal and vertical components of each force acting on the system (Figure 5.27).
FIGURE 5.27 When the vectors are projected onto vertical and horizontal axes, their components along these axes must add to zero, since
the tightrope walker is stationary. The small angle results in Tbeing much greater than w.
Consider the horizontal components of the forces (denoted with a subscript x):
The net external horizontal force since the person is stationary. Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org
5.6 • Common Forces 225
Now observe Figure 5.27. You can use trigonometry to determine the magnitude of and :
Equating T Lx and T Rx:
Thus,
as predicted. Now, considering the vertical components (denoted by a subscript y), we can solve for T . Again, since
the person is stationary, Newton’s second law implies that . Thus, as illustrated in the free-body diagram,
We can use trigonometry to determine the relationships among analysis in the horizontal direction, :
and T . As we determined from the
Now we can substitute the vales for and , into the net force equation in the vertical direction:
and
so
and the tension is
Significance
The vertical tension in the wire acts as a force that supports the weight of the tightrope walker. The tension is almost
six times the 686-N weight of the tightrope walker. Since the wire is nearly horizontal, the vertical component of its
tension is only a fraction of the tension in the wire. The large horizontal components are in opposite directions and
cancel, so most of the tension in the wire is not used to support the weight of the tightrope walker.
If we wish to create a large tension, all we have to do is exert a force perpendicular to a taut flexible connector, as
226 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
illustrated in Figure 5.26. As we saw in Example 5.13, the weight of the tightrope walker acts as a force
perpendicular to the rope. We saw that the tension in the rope is related to the weight of the tightrope walker in the
following way:
We can extend this expression to describe the tension Tcreated when a perpendicular force middle of a flexible connector:
is exerted at the
The angle between the horizontal and the bent connector is represented by . In this case, Tbecomes large as
approaches zero. Even the relatively small weight of any flexible connector will cause it to sag, since an infinite
tension would result if it were horizontal (i.e., and sin ). For example, Figure 5.28 shows a situation
where we wish to pull a car out of the mud when no tow truck is available. Each time the car moves forward, the
chain is tightened to keep it as straight as possible. The tension in the chain is given by and since small, Tis large. This situation is analogous to the tightrope walker, except that the tensions shown here are those
transmitted to the car and the tree rather than those acting at the point where is applied.
is
FIGURE 5.28 We can create a large tension in the chain—and potentially a big mess—by pushing on it perpendicular to its length, as shown.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.9
One end of a 3.0-m rope is tied to a tree; the other end is tied to a car stuck in the mud. The motorist pulls sideways
on the midpoint of the rope, displacing it a distance of 0.25 m. If he exerts a force of 200.0 N under these
conditions, determine the force exerted on the car.
In Applications of Newton’s Laws, we extend the discussion on tension in a cable to include cases in which the
angles shown are not equal.
Friction
Friction is a resistive force opposing motion or its tendency. Imagine an object at rest on a horizontal surface. The
net force acting on the object must be zero, leading to equality of the weight and the normal force, which act in
opposite directions. If the surface is tilted, the normal force balances the component of the weight perpendicular to
the surface. If the object does not slide downward, the component of the weight parallel to the inclined plane is
balanced by friction. Friction is discussed in greater detail in the next chapter.
Spring force
A spring is a special medium with a specific atomic structure that has the ability to restore its shape, if deformed. To
restore its shape, a spring exerts a restoring force that is proportional to and in the opposite direction in which it is
stretched or compressed. This is the statement of a law known as Hooke’s law, which has the mathematical form
5.11
The constant of proportionality kis a measure of the spring’s stiffness. The line of action of this force is parallel to
the spring axis, and the sense of the force is in the opposite direction of the displacement vector (Figure 5.29). The
displacement must be measured from the relaxed position; when the spring is relaxed.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.6 • Common Forces 227
FIGURE 5.29 A spring exerts its force proportional to a displacement, whether it is compressed or stretched. (a) The spring is in a relaxed
position and exerts no force on the block. (b) The spring is compressed by displacement of the object and exerts restoring force
(c) The spring is stretched by displacement of the object and exerts restoring force
Real Forces and Inertial Frames
There is another distinction among forces: Some forces are real, whereas others are not. R eal f orces have some
physical origin, such as a gravitational pull. In contrast, fictitious f orces arise simply because an observer is in an
accelerating or noninertial frame of reference, such as one that rotates (like a merry-go-round) or undergoes linear
acceleration (like a car slowing down). For example, if a satellite is heading due north above Earth’s Northern
Hemisphere, then to an observer on Earth, it will appear to experience a force to the west that has no physical origin.
Instead, Earth is rotating toward the east and moves east under the satellite. In Earth’s frame, this looks like a
westward force on the satellite, or it can be interpreted as a violation of Newton’s first law (the law of inertia). We
can identify a fictitious force by asking the question, “What is the reaction force?” If we cannot name the reaction
force, then the force we are considering is fictitious. In the example of the satellite, the reaction force would have to
be an eastward force on Earth. Recall that an inertial frame of reference is one in which all forces are real and,
equivalently, one in which Newton’s laws have the simple forms given in this chapter.
Earth’s rotation is slow enough that Earth is nearly an inertial frame. You ordinarily must perform precise
experiments to observe fictitious forces and the slight departures from Newton’s laws, such as the effect just
described. On a large scale, such as for the rotation of weather systems and ocean currents, the effects can be easily
observed (Figure 5.30).
FIGURE 5.30 Hurricane Fran is shown heading toward the southeastern coast of the United States in September 1996. Notice the
characteristic “eye” shape of the hurricane. This is a result of the Coriolis effect, which is the deflection of objects (in this case, air) when
considered in a rotating frame of reference, like the spin of Earth. This hurricane shows a counter-clockwise rotation because it is a low
pressure storm. (credit "runner": modification of work by "Greenwich Photography"/Flickr)
The crucial factor in determining whether a frame of reference is inertial is whether it accelerates or rotates relative
to a known inertial frame. Unless stated otherwise, all phenomena discussed in this text are in inertial frames.
228 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
The forces discussed in this section are real forces, but they are not the only real forces. Lift and thrust, for example,
are more specialized real forces. In the long list of forces, are some more basic than others? Are some different
manifestations of the same underlying force? The answer to both questions is yes, as you will see in the treatment of
modern physics later in the text.
INTERACTIVE
Explore forces and motion in this interactive simulation (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ramp) as you push household
objects up and down a ramp. Lower and raise the ramp to see how the angle of inclination affects the parallel forces.
Graphs show forces, energy, and work.
INTERACTIVE
Stretch and compress springs in the simulation below to explore the relationships among force, spring constant, and
displacement. Investigate what happens when two springs are connected in series and in parallel.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/5-6-common-forces)
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the rules for drawing a free-body diagram
• Construct free-body diagrams for different situations
The first step in describing and analyzing most phenomena in physics involves the careful drawing of a free-body
diagram. Free-body diagrams have been used in examples throughout this chapter. Remember that a free-body
diagram must only include the external forces acting on the body of interest. Once we have drawn an accurate free-
body diagram, we can apply Newton’s first law if the body is in equilibrium (balanced forces; that is, ) or
Newton’s second law if the body is accelerating (unbalanced force; that is, ).
In Forces, we gave a brief problem-solving strategy to help you understand free-body diagrams. Here, we add some
details to the strategy that will help you in constructing these diagrams.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Constructing Free-Body Diagrams
Observe the following rules when constructing a free-body diagram:
1. 2. 3. 4. Draw the object under consideration; it does not have to be artistic. At first, you may want to draw a circle
around the object of interest to be sure you focus on labeling the forces acting on the object. If you are
treating the object as a particle (no size or shape and no rotation), represent the object as a point. We often
place this point at the origin of an xy-coordinate system.
Include all forces that act on the object, representing these forces as vectors. Consider the types of forces
described in Common Forces—normal force, friction, tension, and spring force—as well as weight and applied
force. Do not include the net force on the object. With the exception of gravity, all of the forces we have
discussed require direct contact with the object. However, forces that the object exerts on its environment
must not be included. We never include both forces of an action-reaction pair.
Convert the free-body diagram into a more detailed diagram showing the x- and y-components of a given
force (this is often helpful when solving a problem using Newton’s first or second law). In this case, place a
squiggly line through the original vector to show that it is no longer in play—it has been replaced by its x- and
y-components.
If there are two or more objects, or bodies, in the problem, draw a separate free-body diagram for each object.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.7 • Drawing Free-Body Diagrams 229
Not e: If there is acceleration, we do not directly include it in the free-body diagram; however, it may help to indicate
acceleration outside the free-body diagram. You can label it in a different color to indicate that it is separate from
the free-body diagram.
Let’s apply the problem-solving strategy in drawing a free-body diagram for a sled. In Figure 5.31(a), a sled is pulled
by force P at an angle of . In part (b), we show a free-body diagram for this situation, as described by steps 1 and
2 of the problem-solving strategy. In part (c), we show all forces in terms of their x- and y-components, in keeping
with step 3.
FIGURE 5.31 (a) A moving sled is shown as (b) a free-body diagram and (c) a free-body diagram with force components.
EXAMPLE 5.14
Two Blocks on an Inclined Plane
Construct the free-body diagram for object A and object B in Figure 5.32.
Strategy
We follow the four steps listed in the problem-solving strategy.
Solution
We start by creating a diagram for the first object of interest. In Figure 5.32(a), object A is isolated (circled) and
represented by a dot.
FIGURE 5.32 (a) The free-body diagram for isolated object A. (b) The free-body diagram for isolated object B. Comparing the two drawings,
we see that friction acts in the opposite direction in the two figures. Because object A experiences a force that tends to pull it to the right,
friction must act to the left. Because object B experiences a component of its weight that pulls it to the left, down the incline, the friction
force must oppose it and act up the ramp. Friction always acts opposite the intended direction of motion.
230 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
We now include any force that acts on the body. Here, no applied force is present. The weight of the object acts as a
force pointing vertically downward, and the presence of the cord indicates a force of tension pointing away from the
object. Object A has one interface and hence experiences a normal force, directed away from the interface. The
source of this force is object B, and this normal force is labeled accordingly. Since object B has a tendency to slide
down, object A has a tendency to slide up with respect to the interface, so the friction is directed downward
parallel to the inclined plane.
As noted in step 4 of the problem-solving strategy, we then construct the free-body diagram in Figure 5.32(b) using
the same approach. Object B experiences two normal forces and two friction forces due to the presence of two
contact surfaces. The interface with the inclined plane exerts external forces of and , and the interface with
object B exerts the normal force and friction ; is directed away from object B, and is opposing
the tendency of the relative motion of object B with respect to object A.
Significance
The object under consideration in each part of this problem was circled in gray. When you are first learning how to
draw free-body diagrams, you will find it helpful to circle the object before deciding what forces are acting on that
particular object. This focuses your attention, preventing you from considering forces that are not acting on the
body.
EXAMPLE 5.15
Two Blocks in Contact
A force is applied to two blocks in contact, as shown. Draw the reaction forces between the two blocks.
Strategy
blocks touch.
Draw a free-body diagram for each block. Be sure to consider Newton’s third law at the interface where the two
Solution
Significance
is the action force of block 2 on block 1. diagrams in Applications of Newton’s Laws.
is the reaction force of block 1 on block 2. We use these free-body
Access for free at openstax.org
5.7 • Drawing Free-Body Diagrams 231
EXAMPLE 5.16
Block on the Table (Coupled Blocks)
A block rests on the table, as shown. A light rope is attached to it and runs over a pulley. The other end of the rope is
attached to a second block. The two blocks are said to be coupled. Block exerts a force due to its weight, which
causes the system (two blocks and a string) to accelerate.
Strategy
We assume that the string has no mass so that we do not have to consider it as a separate object. Draw a free-body
diagram for each block.
Solution
and Significance
Each block accelerates (notice the labels shown for ); however, assuming the string remains taut, the
magnitudes of acceleration are equal. Thus, we have . If we were to continue solving the problem, we
could simply call the acceleration . Also, we use two free-body diagrams because we are usually finding tension T ,
which may require us to use a system of two equations in this type of problem. The tension is the same on both
.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 5.10
(a) Draw the free-body diagram for the situation shown. (b) Redraw it showing components; use x-axes parallel to
the two ramps.
232 5 • Newton's Laws of Motion
INTERACTIVE
Engage the simulation below to predict, qualitatively, how an external force will affect the speed and direction of an
object’s motion. Explain the effects with the help of a free-body diagram. Use free-body diagrams to draw position,
velocity, acceleration, and force graphs, and vice versa. Explain how the graphs relate to one another. Given a
scenario or a graph, sketch all four graphs.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/5-7-drawing-free-
body-diagrams)
Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter Review
Key Terms
dynamics study of how forces affect the motion of
objects and systems
external force force acting on an object or system
that originates outside of the object or system
force push or pull on an object with a specific
magnitude and direction; can be represented by
vectors or expressed as a multiple of a standard
force
free fall situation in which the only force acting on an
object is gravity
free-body diagram sketch showing all external forces
acting on an object or system; the system is
represented by a single isolated point, and the
forces are represented by vectors extending
outward from that point
Hooke’s law in a spring, a restoring force proportional
to and in the opposite direction of the imposed
displacement
inertia ability of an object to resist changes in its
motion
inertial reference frame reference frame moving at
constant velocity relative to an inertial frame is also
inertial; a reference frame accelerating relative to an
inertial frame is not inertial
law of inertia see Newton’s first law of motion
net external force vector sum of all external forces
acting on an object or system; causes a mass to
Key Equations
Net external force
Newton’s first law
Newton’s second law, vector form
Newton’s second law, scalar form
Newton’s second law, component form
Newton’s second law, momentum form
Definition of weight, vector form
Definition of weight, scalar form
Newton’s third law
Normal force on an object resting on a
horizontal surface, vector form
Normal force on an object resting on a
horizontal surface, scalar form
Normal force on an object resting on an
inclined plane, scalar form
5 • Chapter Review 233
accelerate
newton SI unit of force; 1 N is the force needed to
accelerate an object with a mass of 1 kg at a rate of
Newton’s first law of motion body at rest remains at
rest or, if in motion, remains in motion at constant
velocity unless acted on by a net external force; also
known as the law of inertia
Newton’s second law of motion acceleration of a
system is directly proportional to and in the same
direction as the net external force acting on the
system and is inversely proportional to its mass
Newton’s third law of motion whenever one body
exerts a force on a second body, the first body
experiences a force that is equal in magnitude and
opposite in direction to the force that it exerts
normal force force supporting the weight of an
object, or a load, that is perpendicular to the surface
of contact between the load and its support; the
surface applies this force to an object to support the
weight of the object
tension pulling force that acts along a stretched
flexible connector, such as a rope or cable
thrust reaction force that pushes a body forward in
response to a backward force
weight force due to gravity acting on an object of
mass m
234 5 • Chapter Review
Restoring force by a spring displaced by
x from the relaxed position
Tension in a cable supporting an object
of mass m at rest, scalar form
Summary
5.1 Forces
• Dynamics is the study of how forces affect the
motion of objects, whereas kinematics simply
describes the way objects move.
• Force is a push or pull that can be defined in
terms of various standards, and it is a vector that
has both magnitude and direction.
• External forces are any outside forces that act on
a body. A free-body diagram is a drawing of all
external forces acting on a body.
• The SI unit of force is the newton (N).
5.2 Newton's First Law
• According to Newton’s first law, there must be a
cause for any change in velocity (a change in
either magnitude or direction) to occur. This law
is also known as the law of inertia.
• Friction is an external force that causes an object
to slow down.
• Inertia is the tendency of an object to remain at
rest or remain in motion. Inertia is related to an
object’s mass.
• If an object’s velocity relative to a given frame is
constant, then the frame is inertial. This means
that for an inertial reference frame, Newton’s first
law is valid.
• Equilibrium is achieved when the forces on a
system are balanced.
• A net force of zero means that an object is either
at rest or moving with constant velocity; that is, it
is not accelerating.
5.3 Newton's Second Law
• An external force acts on a system from outside
the system, as opposed to internal forces, which
act between components within the system.
• Newton’s second law of motion says that the net
external force on an object with a certain mass is
directly proportional to and in the same direction
as the acceleration of the object.
• Newton’s second law can also describe net force
as the instantaneous rate of change of
momentum. Thus, a net external force causes
nonzero acceleration.
Access for free at openstax.org
5.4 Mass and Weight
• Mass is the quantity of matter in a substance.
• The weight of an object is the net force on a
falling object, or its gravitational force. The object
experiences acceleration due to gravity.
• Some upward resistance force from the air acts
on all falling objects on Earth, so they can never
truly be in free fall.
• Careful distinctions must be made between free
fall and weightlessness using the definition of
weight as force due to gravity acting on an object
of a certain mass.
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
• Newton’s third law of motion represents a basic
symmetry in nature, with an experienced force
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to
an exerted force.
• Two equal and opposite forces do not cancel
because they act on different systems.
• Action-reaction pairs include a swimmer pushing
off a wall, helicopters creating lift by pushing air
down, and an octopus propelling itself forward by
ejecting water from its body. Rockets, airplanes,
and cars are pushed forward by a thrust reaction
force.
• Choosing a system is an important analytical step
in understanding the physics of a problem and
solving it.
5.6 Common Forces
• When an object rests on a surface, the surface
applies a force to the object that supports the
weight of the object. This supporting force acts
perpendicular to and away from the surface. It is
called a normal force.
• When an object rests on a nonaccelerating
horizontal surface, the magnitude of the normal
force is equal to the weight of the object.
• When an object rests on an inclined plane that
makes an angle with the horizontal surface, the
weight of the object can be resolved into
components that act perpendicular and parallel
to the surface of the plane.
• The pulling force that acts along a stretched
flexible connector, such as a rope or cable, is
called tension. When a rope supports the weight
of an object at rest, the tension in the rope is
equal to the weight of the object. If the object is
accelerating, tension is greater than weight, and
if it is accelerating opposite to the motion,
tension is less than weight.
• The force of friction is a force experienced by a
moving object (or an object that has a tendency
to move) parallel to the interface opposing the
motion (or its tendency).
• The force developed in a spring obeys Hooke’s
law, according to which its magnitude is
proportional to the displacement and has a sense
in the opposite direction of the displacement.
• Real forces have a physical origin, whereas
Conceptual Questions
5.1 Forces
1. What properties do forces have that allow us to
classify them as vectors?
5.2 Newton's First Law
2. 3. Taking a frame attached to Earth as inertial,
which of the following objects cannot have
inertial frames attached to them, and which are
inertial reference frames?
(a) A car moving at constant velocity
(b) A car that is accelerating
(c) An elevator in free fall
(d) A space capsule orbiting Earth
(e) An elevator descending uniformly
A woman was transporting an open box of
cupcakes to a school party. The car in front of
her stopped suddenly; she applied her brakes
immediately. She was wearing her seat belt and
suffered no physical harm (just a great deal of
embarrassment), but the cupcakes flew into the
dashboard and became “smushcakes.” Explain
what happened.
5.3 Newton's Second Law
4. 5. Why can we neglect forces such as those holding
a body together when we apply Newton’s
second law?
A rock is thrown straight up. At the top of the
trajectory, the velocity is momentarily zero. Does
this imply that the force acting on the object is
zero? Explain your answer.
5.4 Mass and Weight
6. What is the relationship between weight and
5 • Chapter Review 235
fictitious forces occur because the observer is in
an accelerating or noninertial frame of reference.
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
• To draw a free-body diagram, we draw the object
of interest, draw all forces acting on that object,
and resolve all force vectors into x- and
y-components. We must draw a separate free-
body diagram for each object in the problem.
• A free-body diagram is a useful means of
describing and analyzing all the forces that act on
a body to determine equilibrium according to
Newton’s first law or acceleration according to
Newton’s second law.
7. 8. 9. 10. mass? Which is an intrinsic, unchanging property
of a body?
How much does a 70-kg astronaut weight in
space, far from any celestial body? What is her
mass at this location?
Which of the following statements is accurate?
(a) Mass and weight are the same thing
expressed in different units.
(b) If an object has no weight, it must have no
mass.
(c) If the weight of an object varies, so must the
mass.
(d) Mass and inertia are different concepts.
(e) Weight is always proportional to mass.
When you stand on Earth, your feet push against
it with a force equal to your weight. Why doesn’t
Earth accelerate away from you?
How would you give the value of in vector
form?
5.5 Newton’s Third Law
11. 12. 13. Identify the action and reaction forces in the
following situations: (a) Earth attracts the Moon,
(b) a boy kicks a football, (c) a rocket accelerates
upward, (d) a car accelerates forward, (e) a high
jumper leaps, and (f) a bullet is shot from a gun.
Suppose that you are holding a cup of coffee in
your hand. Identify all forces on the cup and the
reaction to each force.
(a) Why does an ordinary rifle recoil (kick
backward) when fired? (b) The barrel of a
recoilless rifle is open at both ends. Describe
how Newton’s third law applies when one is
236 5 • Chapter Review
fired. (c) Can you safely stand close behind one
when it is fired?
5.6 Common Forces
14. 15. A table is placed on a rug. Then a book is placed
on the table. What does the floor exert a normal
force on?
A particle is moving to the right. (a) Can the force
on it be acting to the left? If yes, what would
happen? (b) Can that force be acting downward?
If yes, why?
Problems
5.1 Forces
19. 20. Two ropes are attached to a tree, and forces of
and
are applied. The forces are coplanar (in the same
plane). (a) What is the resultant (net force) of
these two force vectors? (b) Find the magnitude
and direction of this net force.
A telephone pole has three cables pulling as
shown from above, with
, , and
. (a) Find the net force on the
telephone pole in component form. (b) Find the
magnitude and direction of this net force.
21. Two teenagers are pulling on ropes attached to a
tree. The angle between the ropes is .
David pulls with a force of 400.0 N and
Stephanie pulls with a force of 300.0 N. (a) Find
the component form of the net force. (b) Find the
magnitude of the resultant (net) force on the
tree and the angle it makes with David’s rope.
5.2 Newton's First Law
22. Two forces of and
Access for free at openstax.org
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
16. 17. 18. In completing the solution for a problem
involving forces, what do we do after
constructing the free-body diagram? That is,
what do we apply?
If a book is located on a table, how many forces
should be shown in a free-body diagram of the
book? Describe them.
If the book in the previous question is in free fall,
how many forces should be shown in a free-
body diagram of the book? Describe them.
23. act on an object. Find the
third force two forces.
that is needed to balance the first
While sliding a couch across a floor, Andrea and
Jennifer exert forces and on the couch.
Andrea’s force is due north with a magnitude of
130.0 N and Jennifer’s force is east of north
with a magnitude of 180.0 N. (a) Find the net
force in component form. (b) Find the magnitude
and direction of the net force. (c) If Andrea and
Jennifer’s housemates, David and Stephanie,
disagree with the move and want to prevent its
relocation, with what combined force
should they push so that the couch does not
move?
5.3 Newton's Second Law
Andrea, a 63.0-kg sprinter, starts a race with an
acceleration of . What is the net
external force on her?
If the sprinter from the previous problem
accelerates at that rate for 20.00 m and then
maintains that velocity for the remainder of a
100.00-m dash, what will her time be for the
race?
A cleaner pushes a 4.50-kg laundry cart in such
a way that the net external force on it is 60.0 N.
Calculate the magnitude of his cart’s
acceleration.
Astronauts in orbit are apparently weightless.
This means that a clever method of measuring
the mass of astronauts is needed to monitor
their mass gains or losses, and adjust their diet.
One way to do this is to exert a known force on
an astronaut and measure the acceleration
24. 25. 26. 27. 
If the rocket sled shown in the previous problem
starts with only one rocket burning, what is the
magnitude of this acceleration? Assume that the
mass of the system is kg, the thrust
Tis and the force of friction
opposing the motion is 650.0 N. (b) Why is the
acceleration not one-fourth of what it is with all
rockets burning?
What is the acceleration opposite to the motion
of the rocket sled if it comes to rest in 1.10 s
from a speed of 1000.0 km/h? (Such
acceleration opposite to the motion caused one
test subject to black out and have temporary
blindness.)
Suppose two children push horizontally, but in
exactly opposite directions, on a third child in a
wagon. The first child exerts a force of 75.0 N,
the second exerts a force of 90.0 N, friction is
12.0 N, and the mass of the third child plus
33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 5 • Chapter Review 237
wagon is 23.0 kg. (a) What is the system of
interest if the acceleration of the child in the
wagon is to be calculated? (See the free-body
diagram.) (b) Calculate the acceleration. (c)
What would the acceleration be if friction were
15.0 N?
28. 29. 30. 31. 32. produced. Suppose a net external force of 50.0
N is exerted, and an astronaut’s acceleration is
measured to be . (a) Calculate her
mass. (b) By exerting a force on the astronaut,
the vehicle in which she orbits experiences an
equal and opposite force. Use this knowledge to
find an equation for the acceleration of the
system (astronaut and spaceship) that would be
measured by a nearby observer. (c) Discuss how
this would affect the measurement of the
astronaut’s acceleration. Propose a method by
which recoil of the vehicle is avoided.
In Figure 5.12, the net external force on the
24-kg mower is given as 51 N. If the force of
friction opposing the motion is 24 N, what force
F(in newtons) is the person exerting on the
mower? Suppose the mower is moving at 1.5
m/s when the force Fis removed. How far will
the mower go before stopping?
The rocket sled shown below accelerates opposite
to the motion at a rate of . What force is
necessary to produce this acceleration opposite to
the motion? Assume that the rockets are off. The
mass of the system is kg.
A powerful motorcycle can produce an
acceleration of while traveling at 90.0
km/h. At that speed, the forces resisting motion,
including friction and air resistance, total 400.0
N. (Air resistance is analogous to air friction. It
always opposes the motion of an object.) What is
the magnitude of the force that motorcycle
exerts backward on the ground to produce its
acceleration if the mass of the motorcycle with
rider is 245 kg?
A car with a mass of 1000.0 kg accelerates from
0 to 90.0 km/h in 10.0 s. (a) What is its
acceleration? (b) What is the net force on the
car?
The driver in the previous problem applies the
brakes when the car is moving at 90.0 km/h, and
the car comes to rest after traveling 40.0 m.
What is the net force on the car during its
acceleration opposite to the motion?
An 80.0-kg passenger in an SUV traveling at
km/h is wearing a seat belt. The
driver slams on the brakes and the SUV stops in
45.0 m. Find the force of the seat belt on the
passenger.
A particle of mass 2.0 kg is acted on by a single
force (a) What is the particle’s
acceleration? (b) If the particle starts at rest,
how far does it travel in the first 5.0 s?
Suppose that the particle of the previous
problem also experiences forces
and What is its acceleration in this
case?
Find the acceleration of the body of mass 5.0 kg
shown below.
238 5 • Chapter Review
40. In the following figure, the horizontal surface on
which this block slides is frictionless. If the two
forces acting on it each have magnitude
and , what is the
magnitude of the resulting acceleration of the
block?
5.4 Mass and Weight
41. 42. 43. 44. 45. The weight of an astronaut plus their space suit
on the Moon is only 250 N. (a) How much does
the suited astronaut weigh on Earth? (b) What is
the mass on the Moon? On Earth?
Suppose the mass of a fully loaded module in
which astronauts take off from the Moon is
kg. The thrust of its engines is
N. (a) Calculate the module’s
magnitude of acceleration in a vertical takeoff
from the Moon. (b) Could it lift off from Earth? If
not, why not? If it could, calculate the magnitude
of its acceleration.
A rocket sled accelerates at a rate of .
Its passenger has a mass of 75.0 kg. (a)
Calculate the horizontal component of the force
the seat exerts against his body. Compare this
with his weight using a ratio. (b) Calculate the
direction and magnitude of the total force the
seat exerts against his body.
Repeat the previous problem for a situation in
which the rocket sled accelerates opposite to
the motion at a rate of . In this
problem, the forces are exerted by the seat and
the seat belt.
A body of mass 2.00 kg is pushed straight
upward by a 25.0 N vertical force. What is its
acceleration?
Access for free at openstax.org
46. 47. 48. 49. 50. A car weighing 12,500 N starts from rest and
accelerates to 83.0 km/h in 5.00 s. The friction
force is 1350 N. Find the applied force produced
by the engine.
A body with a mass of 10.0 kg is assumed to be
in Earth’s gravitational field with .
What is the net force on the body if there are no
other external forces acting on the object?
A firefighter has mass m; they hear the fire alarm
and slides down the pole with acceleration a
(which is less than g in magnitude). (a) Write an
equation giving the vertical force they must
apply to the pole. (b) If their mass is 90.0 kg and
they accelerate at what is the
magnitude of their applied force?
A baseball catcher is performing a stunt for a
television commercial. He will catch a baseball
(mass 145 g) dropped from a height of 60.0 m
above his glove. His glove stops the ball in
0.0100 s. What is the force exerted by his glove
on the ball?
When the Moon is directly overhead at sunset,
the force by Earth on the Moon, , is
essentially at to the force by the Sun on the
Moon, , as shown below. Given that
and
all other forces on the
Moon are negligible, and the mass of the Moon is
determine the magnitude of
the Moon’s acceleration.
51. 5.5 Newton’s Third Law
(a) What net external force is exerted on a
1100.0-kg artillery shell fired from a battleship if
the shell is accelerated at (b)
What is the magnitude of the force exerted on
the ship by the artillery shell, and why?
A rugby player is being pushed backward by an
opposing player who is exerting a force of 800.0
N on him. The mass of the losing player plus
equipment is 90.0 kg, and he is accelerating
backward at . (a) What is the force of
52. 
54. A truck collides with a car, and during the
collision, the net force on each vehicle is
essentially the force exerted by the other.
Suppose the mass of the car is 550 kg, the mass
of the truck is 2200 kg, and the magnitude of the
truck’s acceleration is . Find the
magnitude of the car’s acceleration.
5.6 Common Forces
55. A leg is suspended in a traction system, as
shown below. (a) Which pulley in the figure is
used to calculate the force exerted on the foot?
(b) What is the tension in the rope? Here is the
tension, is the weight of the leg, and is
the weight of the load that provides the tension.
Express answers in terms of the unknown
56. 57. 58. 59. 5 • Chapter Review 239
masses and angle.
53. friction between the losing player’s feet and the
grass? (b) What force does the winning player
exert on the ground to move forward if his mass
plus equipment is 110.0 kg?
A history book is lying on top of a physics book on a
desk, as shown below; a free-body diagram is also
shown. The history and physics books weigh 14 N
and 18 N, respectively. Identify each force on each
book with a double subscript notation (for instance,
the contact force of the history book pressing
against physics book can be described as ), and
determine the value of each of these forces,
explaining the process used.
Suppose the shinbone in the preceding image
was a femur in a traction setup for a broken
bone, with pulleys and rope available. How
might we be able to increase the force along the
femur using the same weight?
Two teams of nine members each engage in a
tug-of-war, pulling in opposite directions on a
horizontal rope. Each of the first team’s
members has an average mass of 68 kg and
exerts an average force of 1350 N horizontally
on the ground as they pull on the rope. Each of
the second team’s members has an average
mass of 73 kg and exerts an average force of
1365 N horizontally on the ground as they pull
on the rope in the opposite direction. (a) What is
the magnitude of the acceleration of the two
teams, and which team wins? (b) What is the
tension in the section of rope between the
teams?
What force does a trampoline have to apply to
Jennifer, a 45.0-kg gymnast, to accelerate her
straight up at ? The answer is
independent of the velocity of the gymnast—she
can be moving up or down or can be instantly
stationary.
(a) Calculate the tension in a vertical strand of
spider web if a spider of mass
hangs motionless on it. (b) Calculate the tension
in a horizontal strand of spider web if the same
spider sits motionless in the middle of it much
like the tightrope walker in Figure 5.26. The
strand sags at an angle of below the
horizontal. Compare this with the tension in the
240 5 • Chapter Review
60. 61. 62. 63. vertical strand (find their ratio).
Suppose Kevin, a 60.0-kg gymnast, climbs a
rope. (a) What is the tension in the rope if he
climbs at a constant speed? (b) What is the
tension in the rope if he accelerates upward at a
rate of ?
Show that, as explained in the text, a force
exerted on a flexible medium at its center and
perpendicular to its length (such as on the
tightrope wire in Figure 5.26) gives rise to a
tension of magnitude .
Consider Figure 5.28. The driver attempts to get
the car out of the mud by exerting a
perpendicular force of 610.0 N, and the distance
she pushes in the middle of the rope is 1.00 m
while she stands 6.00 m away from the car on
the left and 6.00 m away from the tree on the
right. What is the tension Tin the rope, and how
do you find the answer?
A bird has a mass of 26 g and perches in the middle
of a stretched telephone line. (a) Show that the
tension in the line can be calculated using the
equation . Determine the tension when
(b) and (c) . Assume that each half
of the line is straight.
64. 65. One end of a 30-m rope is tied to a tree; the
other end is tied to a car stuck in the mud. The
motorist pulls sideways on the midpoint of the
rope, displacing it a distance of 2 m. If he exerts
a force of 80 N under these conditions,
determine the force exerted on the car.
Consider the baby being weighed in the
following figure. (a) What is the mass of the
infant and basket if a scale reading of 55 N is
observed? (b) What is tension in the cord
attaching the baby to the scale? (c) What is
tension in the cord attaching the scale to the
ceiling, if the scale has a mass of 0.500 kg? (d)
Sketch the situation, indicating the system of
interest used to solve each part. The masses of
the cords are negligible.
Access for free at openstax.org
66. What force must be applied to a 100.0-kg crate
on a frictionless plane inclined at to cause
an acceleration of up the plane?
67. A 2.0-kg block is on a perfectly smooth ramp
that makes an angle of with the horizontal.
(a) What is the block’s acceleration down the
ramp and the force of the ramp on the block? (b)
What force applied upward along and parallel to
the ramp would allow the block to move with
constant velocity?
5.7 Drawing Free-Body Diagrams
68. A ball of mass m hangs at rest, suspended by a
string. (a) Sketch all forces. (b) Draw the free-
body diagram for the ball.
A car moves along a horizontal road. Draw a
free-body diagram; be sure to include the
friction of the road that opposes the forward
69. 
5 • Chapter Review 241
Draw a free-body diagram on a coordinate plane
for this situation.
70. motion of the car.
A runner pushes against the track, as shown. (a)
Provide a free-body diagram showing all the
forces on the runner. (Hint: Place all forces at the
center of his body, and include his weight.) (b)
Give a revised diagram showing the
xy-component form.
(credit: modification of work by "Greenwich
Photography"/Flickr)
71. The traffic light hangs from the cables as shown.
Additional Problems
72. Two small forces, 73. 74. 75. N and
N, are exerted on a rogue
asteroid by a pair of space tractors. (a) Find the
net force. (b) What are the magnitude and
direction of the net force? (c) If the mass of the
asteroid is 125 kg, what acceleration does it
experience (in vector form)? (d) What are the
magnitude and direction of the acceleration?
Two forces of 25 and 45 N act on an object.
Their directions differ by . The resulting
acceleration has magnitude of What
is the mass of the body?
A force of 1600 N acts parallel to a ramp to push
a 300-kg piano into a moving van. The ramp is
inclined at . (a) What is the acceleration of
the piano up the ramp? (b) What is the velocity
of the piano when it reaches the top if the ramp
is 4.0 m long and the piano starts from rest?
Draw a free-body diagram of a diver who has
entered the water, moved downward, and is
acted on by an upward force due to the water
which balances the weight (that is, the diver is
suspended).
76. 77. 78. 79. For a swimmer who has just jumped off a diving
board, assume air resistance is negligible. The
swimmer has a mass of 80.0 kg and jumps off a
board 10.0 m above the water. Three seconds
after entering the water, her downward motion is
stopped. What average upward force did the
water exert on her?
(a) Find an equation to determine the magnitude
of the net force required to stop a car of mass m,
given that the initial speed of the car is and
the stopping distance is x. (b) Find the
magnitude of the net force if the mass of the car
is 1050 kg, the initial speed is 40.0 km/h, and
the stopping distance is 25.0 m.
A sailboat has a mass of kg and is
acted on by a force of N toward the
east, while the wind acts behind the sails with a
force of N in a direction north of
east. Find the magnitude and direction of the
resulting acceleration.
Find the acceleration of the body of mass 10.0
kg shown below.
242 5 • Chapter Review
80. A body of mass 2.0 kg is moving along the x-axis
with a speed of 3.0 m/s at the instant
represented below. (a) What is the acceleration
of the body? (b) What is the body’s velocity 10.0
s later? (c) What is its displacement after 10.0 s?
81. Force has twice the magnitude of force
Find the direction in which the particle
accelerates in this figure.
82. Shown below is a body of mass 1.0 kg under the
influence of the forces , , and . If the
body accelerates to the left at , what are
and ?
Access for free at openstax.org
83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88. A force acts on a car of mass m so that the
speed v of the car increases with position x as
, where kis constant and all quantities
are in SI units. Find the force acting on the car as
a function of position.
A 7.0-N force parallel to an incline is applied to a
1.0-kg crate. The ramp is tilted at and is
frictionless. (a) What is the acceleration of the
crate? (b) If all other conditions are the same
but the ramp has a friction force of 1.9 N, what is
the acceleration?
Two boxes, A and B, are at rest. Box A is on level
ground, while box B rests on an inclined plane
tilted at angle with the horizontal. (a) Write
expressions for the normal force acting on each
block. (b) Compare the two forces; that is, tell
which one is larger or whether they are equal in
magnitude. (c) If the angle of incline is ,
which force is greater?
A mass of 250.0 g is suspended from a spring
hanging vertically. The spring stretches 6.00 cm.
How much will the spring stretch if the
suspended mass is 530.0 g?
As shown below, two identical springs, each with
the spring constant 20 N/m, support a 15.0-N
weight. (a) What is the tension in spring A? (b)
What is the amount of stretch of spring A from
the rest position?
Shown below is a 30.0-kg block resting on a
frictionless ramp inclined at to the horizontal.
The block is held by a spring that is stretched 5.0
cm. What is the force constant of the spring?
5 • Chapter Review 243
91. 92. Two forces are applied to a 5.0-kg object, and it
accelerates at a rate of in the positive
y-direction. If one of the forces acts in the
positive x-direction with magnitude 12.0 N, find
the magnitude of the other force.
The block on the right shown below has more
mass than the block on the left ( ). Draw
free-body diagrams for each block.
89. 90. In building a house, carpenters use nails from a
large box. The box is suspended from a spring
twice during the day to measure the usage of
nails. At the beginning of the day, the spring
stretches 50 cm. At the end of the day, the
spring stretches 30 cm. What fraction or
percentage of the nails have been used?
A force is applied to a block to move it up a
incline. The incline is frictionless. If
and , what is the magnitude of the
acceleration of the block?
Challenge Problems
93. If two tugboats pull on a disabled vessel, as shown
here in an overhead view, the disabled vessel will be
pulled along the direction indicated by the result of
the exerted forces. (a) Draw a free-body diagram for
the vessel. Assume no friction or drag forces affect
the vessel. (b) Did you include all forces in the
overhead view in your free-body diagram? Why or
why not?
94. A 10.0-kg object is initially moving east at 15.0
m/s. Then a force acts on it for 2.00 s, after
244 5 • Chapter Review
which it moves northwest, also at 15.0 m/s.
What are the magnitude and direction of the
average force that acted on the object over the
2.00-s interval?
95. On June 25, 1983, shot-putter Udo Beyer of East
Germany threw the 7.26-kg shot 22.22 m, which
at that time was a world record. (a) If the shot
was released at a height of 2.20 m with a
projection angle of , what was its initial
velocity? (b) If while in Beyer’s hand the shot
was accelerated uniformly over a distance of
1.20 m, what was the net force on it?
96. A body of mass m moves in a horizontal
direction such that at time tits position is given
by where a, b , and c are
constants. (a) What is the acceleration of the
body? (b) What is the time-dependent force
acting on the body?
97. A body of mass m has initial velocity in the
positive x-direction. It is acted on by a constant
force Ffor time tuntil the velocity becomes zero;
the force continues to act on the body until its
velocity becomes in the same amount of
time. Write an expression for the total distance
the body travels in terms of the variables
indicated.
98. The velocities of a 3.0-kg object at and
are and
, respectively. If the object is
moving at constant acceleration, what is the
force acting on it?
99. A 120-kg astronaut is riding in a rocket sled that
is sliding along an inclined plane. The sled has a
horizontal component of acceleration of
and a downward component of
. Calculate the magnitude of the force
on the rider by the sled. (Hint : Remember that
gravitational acceleration must be considered.)
100. Two forces are acting on a 5.0-kg object that
moves with acceleration in the positive
y-direction. If one of the forces acts in the
positive x-direction and has magnitude of 12 N,
what is the magnitude of the other force?
101. Suppose that you are viewing a soccer game
from a helicopter above the playing field. Two
soccer players simultaneously kick a stationary
soccer ball on the flat field; the soccer ball has
mass 0.420 kg. The first player kicks with force
162 N at north of west. At the same instant,
Access for free at openstax.org
102. 103. 104. 105. the second player kicks with force 215 N at
east of south. Find the acceleration of the ball in
and form.
A 10.0-kg mass hangs from a spring that has the
spring constant 535 N/m. Find the position of
the end of the spring away from its rest position.
(Use .)
A 0.0502-kg pair of fuzzy dice is attached to the
rearview mirror of a car by a short string. The car
accelerates at constant rate, and the dice hang
at an angle of from the vertical because of
the car’s acceleration. What is the magnitude of
the acceleration of the car?
At a circus, a donkey pulls on a sled carrying a
small clown with a force given by
. A horse pulls on the same
sled, aiding the hapless donkey, with a force of
. The mass of the sled is 575 kg.
Using and form for the answer to each
problem, find (a) the net force on the sled when
the two animals act together, (b) the
acceleration of the sled, and (c) the velocity after
6.50 s.
Hanging from the ceiling over a baby bed, well
out of baby’s reach, is a string with plastic
shapes, as shown here. The string is taut (there
is no slack), as shown by the straight segments.
Each plastic shape has the same mass m, and
they are equally spaced by a distance d , as
shown. The angles labeled describe the angle
formed by the end of the string and the ceiling at
each end. The center length of sting is
horizontal. The remaining two segments each
form an angle with the horizontal, labeled . Let
be the tension in the leftmost section of the
string, be the tension in the section adjacent
to it, and be the tension in the horizontal
segment. (a) Find an equation for the tension in
each section of the string in terms of the
variables m, g, and . (b) Find the angle in
terms of the angle . (c) If , what is the
value of ? (d) Find the distance x between the
endpoints in terms of dand .
106. 107. A bullet shot from a rifle has mass of 10.0 g and
travels to the right at 350 m/s. It strikes a target,
a large bag of sand, penetrating it a distance of
34.0 cm. Find the magnitude and direction of the
retarding force that slows and stops the bullet.
An object is acted on by three simultaneous
forces: ,
, and
. The object
experiences acceleration of . (a) Find
the acceleration vector in terms of m. (b) Find
the mass of the object. (c) If the object begins
from rest, find its speed after 5.00 s. (d) Find the
components of the velocity of the object after
5.00 s.
108. 109. 5 • Chapter Review 245
In a particle accelerator, a proton has mass
and an initial speed of
It moves in a straight line, and
its speed increases to in a
distance of 10.0 cm. Assume that the
acceleration is constant. Find the magnitude of
the force exerted on the proton.
A drone is being directed across a frictionless
ice-covered lake. The mass of the drone is 1.50
kg, and its velocity is . After 10.0 s, the
velocity is . If a constant force
in the horizontal direction is causing this change
in motion, find (a) the components of the force
and (b) the magnitude of the force.
246 5 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 6
Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.1 Stock cars racing in the Grand National Divisional race at Iowa Speedway in May, 2015. Cars often reach speeds of 200 mph
(320 km/h). (credit: modification of work by Erik Schneider/U.S. Navy)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws
6.2 Friction
6.3 Centripetal Force
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
INTRODUCTION
As a racecar moves in a curved path around the turn, its wheels also spin rapidly. The wheels
complete many revolutions while the car makes only part of one (a circular arc). How can we describe the velocities,
accelerations, and forces involved? What force keeps a racecar from spinning out, hitting the wall bordering the
track? What provides this force? Why is the track banked? We answer all of these questions in this chapter as we
expand our consideration of Newton’s laws of motion.
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply problem-solving techniques to solve for quantities in more complex systems of forces
• Use concepts from kinematics to solve problems using Newton’s laws of motion
• Solve more complex equilibrium problems
• Solve more complex acceleration problems
• Apply calculus to more advanced dynamics problems
Success in problem solving is necessary to understand and apply physical principles. We developed a pattern of
analyzing and setting up the solutions to problems involving Newton’s laws in Newton’s Laws of Motion; in this
chapter, we continue to discuss these strategies and apply a step-by-step process.
248 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Problem-Solving Strategies
We follow here the basics of problem solving presented earlier in this text, but we emphasize specific strategies that
are useful in applying Newton’s laws of motion. Once you identify the physical principles involved in the problem and
determine that they include Newton’s laws of motion, you can apply these steps to find a solution. These techniques
also reinforce concepts that are useful in many other areas of physics. Many problem-solving strategies are stated
outright in the worked examples, so the following techniques should reinforce skills you have already begun to
develop.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Applying Newton’s Laws of Motion
1. 2. 3. 4. Identify the physical principles involved by listing the givens and the quantities to be calculated.
Sketch the situation, using arrows to represent all forces.
Determine the system of interest. The result is a free-body diagram that is essential to solving the problem.
Apply Newton’s second law to solve the problem. If necessary, apply appropriate kinematic equations from
the chapter on motion along a straight line.
5. Check the solution to see whether it is reasonable.
Let’s apply this problem-solving strategy to the challenge of lifting a grand piano into a second-story apartment.
Once we have determined that Newton’s laws of motion are involved (if the problem involves forces), it is
particularly important to draw a careful sketch of the situation. Such a sketch is shown in Figure 6.2(a). Then, as in
Figure 6.2(b), we can represent all forces with arrows. Whenever sufficient information exists, it is best to label
these arrows carefully and make the length and direction of each correspond to the represented force.
FIGURE 6.2 (a) A grand piano is being lifted to a second-story apartment. (b) Arrows are used to represent all forces: is the tension in the
rope above the piano, is the force that the piano exerts on the rope, and is the weight of the piano. All other forces, such as the nudge
of a breeze, are assumed to be negligible. (c) Suppose we are given the piano’s mass and asked to find the tension in the rope. We then
define the system of interest as shown and draw a free-body diagram. Now is no longer shown, because it is not a force acting on the
system of interest; rather, acts on the outside world. (d) Showing only the arrows, the head-to-tail method of addition is used. It is
apparent that if the piano is stationary, .
As with most problems, we next need to identify what needs to be determined and what is known or can be inferred
from the problem as stated, that is, make a list of knowns and unknowns. It is particularly crucial to identify the
system of interest, since Newton’s second law involves only external forces. We can then determine which forces
are external and which are internal, a necessary step to employ Newton’s second law. (See Figure 6.2(c).) Newton’s
third law may be used to identify whether forces are exerted between components of a system (internal) or between
Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 249
the system and something outside (external). As illustrated in Newton’s Laws of Motion, the system of interest
depends on the question we need to answer. Only forces are shown in free-body diagrams, not acceleration or
velocity. We have drawn several free-body diagrams in previous worked examples. Figure 6.2(c) shows a free-body
diagram for the system of interest. Note that no internal forces are shown in a free-body diagram.
Once a free-body diagram is drawn, we apply Newton’s second law. This is done in Figure 6.2(d) for a particular
situation. In general, once external forces are clearly identified in free-body diagrams, it should be a straightforward
task to put them into equation form and solve for the unknown, as done in all previous examples. If the problem is
one-dimensional—that is, if all forces are parallel—then the forces can be handled algebraically. If the problem is
two-dimensional, then it must be broken down into a pair of one-dimensional problems. We do this by projecting the
force vectors onto a set of axes chosen for convenience. As seen in previous examples, the choice of axes can
simplify the problem. For example, when an incline is involved, a set of axes with one axis parallel to the incline and
one perpendicular to it is most convenient. It is almost always convenient to make one axis parallel to the direction
of motion, if this is known. Generally, just write Newton’s second law in components along the different directions.
Then, you have the following equations:
(If, for example, the system is accelerating horizontally, then you can then set determine unknown forces acting on a system.
) We need this information to
As always, we must check the solution. In some cases, it is easy to tell whether the solution is reasonable. For
example, it is reasonable to find that friction causes an object to slide down an incline more slowly than when no
friction exists. In practice, intuition develops gradually through problem solving; with experience, it becomes
progressively easier to judge whether an answer is reasonable. Another way to check a solution is to check the units.
If we are solving for force and end up with units of millimeters per second, then we have made a mistake.
There are many interesting applications of Newton’s laws of motion, a few more of which are presented in this
section. These serve also to illustrate some further subtleties of physics and to help build problem-solving skills. We
look first at problems involving particle equilibrium, which make use of Newton’s first law, and then consider particle
acceleration, which involves Newton’s second law.
Particle Equilibrium
Recall that a particle in equilibrium is one for which the external forces are balanced. Static equilibrium involves
objects at rest, and dynamic equilibrium involves objects in motion without acceleration, but it is important to
remember that these conditions are relative. For example, an object may be at rest when viewed from our frame of
reference, but the same object would appear to be in motion when viewed by someone moving at a constant
velocity. We now make use of the knowledge attained in Newton’s Laws of Motion, regarding the different types of
forces and the use of free-body diagrams, to solve additional problems in particle equilibrium.
EXAMPLE 6.1
Different Tensions at Different Angles
Consider the traffic light (mass of 15.0 kg) suspended from two wires as shown in Figure 6.3. Find the tension in
each wire, neglecting the masses of the wires.
250 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.3 A traffic light is suspended from two wires. (b) Some of the forces involved. (c) Only forces acting on the system are shown
here. The free-body diagram for the traffic light is also shown. (d) The forces projected onto vertical (y) and horizontal (x) axes. The
horizontal components of the tensions must cancel, and the sum of the vertical components of the tensions must equal the weight of the
traffic light. (e) The free-body diagram shows the vertical and horizontal forces acting on the traffic light.
Strategy
The system of interest is the traffic light, and its free-body diagram is shown in Figure 6.3(c). The three forces
involved are not parallel, and so they must be projected onto a coordinate system. The most convenient coordinate
system has one axis vertical and one horizontal, and the vector projections on it are shown in Figure 6.3(d). There
are two unknowns in this problem ( and ), so two equations are needed to find them. These two equations
come from applying Newton’s second law along the vertical and horizontal axes, noting that the net external force is
zero along each axis because acceleration is zero.
Solution
First consider the horizontal or x-axis:
Thus, as you might expect,
This gives us the following relationship:
Thus,
Note that and ends up being greater than are not equal in this case because the angles on either side are not equal. It is reasonable that
because it is exerted more vertically than
Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 251
Now consider the force components along the vertical or y-axis:
This implies
Substituting the expressions for the vertical components gives
There are two unknowns in this equation, but substituting the expression for equation with one unknown:
in terms of reduces this to one
which yields
Solving this last equation gives the magnitude of to be
Finally, we find the magnitude of obtain
by using the relationship between them, , found above. Thus we
Significance
Both tensions would be larger if both wires were more horizontal, and they will be equal if and only if the angles on
either side are the same (as they were in the earlier example of a tightrope walker in Newton’s Laws of Motion.
Particle Acceleration
We have given a variety of examples of particles in equilibrium. We now turn our attention to particle acceleration
problems, which are the result of a nonzero net force. Refer again to the steps given at the beginning of this section,
and notice how they are applied to the following examples.
EXAMPLE 6.2
Drag Force on a Barge
Two tugboats push on a barge at different angles (Figure 6.4). The first tugboat exerts a force of in the
x-direction, and the second tugboat exerts a force of in the y-direction. The mass of the barge is
and its acceleration is observed to be in the direction shown. What is the drag force
of the water on the barge resisting the motion? (Not e: Drag force is a frictional force exerted by fluids, such as air or
water. The drag force opposes the motion of the object. Since the barge is flat bottomed, we can assume that the
drag force is in the direction opposite of motion of the barge.)
252 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.4 (a) A view from above of two tugboats pushing on a barge. (b) The free-body diagram for the ship contains only forces acting in
the plane of the water. It omits the two vertical forces—the weight of the barge and the buoyant force of the water supporting it cancel and
are not shown. Note that is the total applied force of the tugboats.
Strategy
The directions and magnitudes of acceleration and the applied forces are given in Figure 6.4(a). We define the total
force of the tugboats on the barge as so that
The drag of the water is in the direction opposite to the direction of motion of the boat; this force thus works
against as shown in the free-body diagram in Figure 6.4(b). The system of interest here is the barge, since the
forces on it are given as well as its acceleration. Because the applied forces are perpendicular, the x- and y-axes are
in the same direction as and The problem quickly becomes a one-dimensional problem along the direction of
, since friction is in the direction opposite to Our strategy is to find the magnitude and direction of the net
applied force and then apply Newton’s second law to solve for the drag force
Solution
Since and are perpendicular, we can find the magnitude and direction of magnitude is given by the Pythagorean theorem:
directly. First, the resultant
The angle is given by
From Newton’s first law, we know this is the same direction as the acceleration. We also know that is in the
opposite direction of since it acts to slow down the acceleration. Therefore, the net external force is in the
same direction as but its magnitude is slightly less than The problem is now one-dimensional. From the
free-body diagram, we can see that
However, Newton’s second law states that
Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 253
This can be solved for the magnitude of the drag force of the water in terms of known quantities:
Substituting known values gives
The direction of of west.
has already been determined to be in the direction opposite to or at an angle of south
Significance
The numbers used in this example are reasonable for a moderately large barge. It is certainly difficult to obtain
larger accelerations with tugboats, and small speeds are desirable to avoid running the barge into the docks. Drag is
relatively small for a well-designed hull at low speeds, consistent with the answer to this example, where is less
than 1/600th of the weight of the ship.
In Newton’s Laws of Motion, we discussed the normal force, which is a contact force that acts normal to the surface
so that an object does not have an acceleration perpendicular to the surface. The bathroom scale is an excellent
example of a normal force acting on a body. It provides a quantitative reading of how much it must push upward to
support the weight of an object. But can you predict what you would see on the dial of a bathroom scale if you stood
on it during an elevator ride? Will you see a value greater than your weight when the elevator starts up? What about
when the elevator moves upward at a constant speed? Take a guess before reading the next example.
EXAMPLE 6.3
What Does the Bathroom Scale Read in an Elevator?
Figure 6.5 shows a 75.0-kg man (weight of about 165 lb.) standing on a bathroom scale in an elevator. Calculate the
scale reading: (a) if the elevator accelerates upward at a rate of and (b) if the elevator moves upward at a
constant speed of 1 m/s.
254 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.5 (a) The various forces acting when a person stands on a bathroom scale in an elevator. The arrows are approximately correct
for when the elevator is accelerating upward—broken arrows represent forces too large to be drawn to scale. supporting cable, is the weight of the person, is the weight of the scale, is the weight of the elevator, the person, is the force of the person on the scale, is the force of the scale on the floor of the elevator, and is the tension in the
is the force of the scale on
is the force of the floor
upward on the scale. (b) The free-body diagram shows only the external forces acting on the designated system of interest—the
person—and is the diagram we use for the solution of the problem.
Strategy
If the scale at rest is accurate, its reading equals , the magnitude of the force the person exerts downward on it.
Figure 6.5(a) shows the numerous forces acting on the elevator, scale, and person. It makes this one-dimensional
problem look much more formidable than if the person is chosen to be the system of interest and a free-body
diagram is drawn, as in Figure 6.5(b). Analysis of the free-body diagram using Newton’s laws can produce answers
to both Figure 6.5(a) and (b) of this example, as well as some other questions that might arise. The only forces
acting on the person are his weight and the upward force of the scale According to Newton’s third law, and
are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that we need to find in order to find what the scale reads.
We can do this, as usual, by applying Newton’s second law,
From the free-body diagram, we see that so we have
Solving for gives us an equation with only one unknown:
or, because simply
Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 255
No assumptions were made about the acceleration, so this solution should be valid for a variety of accelerations in
addition to those in this situation. (Not e: We are considering the case when the elevator is accelerating upward. If
the elevator is accelerating downward, Newton’s second law becomes )
Solution
a. We have so that
yielding
b. and
Now, what happens when the elevator reaches a constant upward velocity? Will the scale still read more than
his weight? For any constant velocity—up, down, or stationary—acceleration is zero because Thus,
or
which gives
Significance
The scale reading in Figure 6.5(a) is about 185 lb. What would the scale have read if he were stationary? Since his
acceleration would be zero, the force of the scale would be equal to his weight:
Thus, the scale reading in the elevator is greater than his 735-N (165-lb.) weight. This means that the scale is
pushing up on the person with a force greater than his weight, as it must in order to accelerate him upward. Clearly,
the greater the acceleration of the elevator, the greater the scale reading, consistent with what you feel in rapidly
accelerating versus slowly accelerating elevators. In Figure 6.5(b), the scale reading is 735 N, which equals the
person’s weight. This is the case whenever the elevator has a constant velocity—moving up, moving down, or
stationary.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.1
Now calculate the scale reading when the elevator accelerates downward at a rate of
The solution to the previous example also applies to an elevator accelerating downward, as mentioned. When an
elevator accelerates downward, a is negative, and the scale reading is less than the weight of the person. If a
constant downward velocity is reached, the scale reading again becomes equal to the person’s weight. If the
elevator is in free fall and accelerating downward at g, then the scale reading is zero and the person appears to be
weightless.
EXAMPLE 6.4
Two Attached Blocks
Figure 6.6 shows a block of mass on a frictionless, horizontal surface. It is pulled by a light string that passes
over a frictionless and massless pulley. The other end of the string is connected to a block of mass Find the
acceleration of the blocks and the tension in the string in terms of
256 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.6 (a) Block 1 is connected by a light string to block 2. (b) The free-body diagrams of the blocks.
Strategy
We draw a free-body diagram for each mass separately, as shown in Figure 6.6. Then we analyze each one to find
the required unknowns. The forces on block 1 are the gravitational force, the contact force of the surface, and the
tension in the string. Block 2 is subjected to the gravitational force and the string tension. Newton’s second law
applies to each, so we write two vector equations:
For block 1:
For block 2:
Notice that is the same for both blocks. Since the string and the pulley have negligible mass, and since there is no
friction in the pulley, the tension is the same throughout the string. We can now write component equations for each
block. All forces are either horizontal or vertical, so we can use the same horizontal/vertical coordinate system for
both objects
Solution
The component equations follow from the vector equations above. We see that block 1 has the vertical forces
balanced, so we ignore them and write an equation relating the x-components. There are no horizontal forces on
block 2, so only the y-equation is written. We obtain these results:
When block 1 moves to the right, block 2 travels an equal distance downward; thus, common acceleration of the blocks as we now have
Writing the
and
From these two equations, we can express a and Tin terms of the masses
Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 257
and
Significance
Notice that the tension in the string is less than the weight of the block hanging from the end of it. A common error in
problems like this is to set You can see from the free-body diagram of block 2 that cannot be correct if the
block is accelerating.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.2
Calculate the acceleration of the system, and the tension in the string, when the masses are and
EXAMPLE 6.5
Atwood Machine
A classic problem in physics, similar to the one we just solved, is that of the Atwood machine, which consists of a
rope running over a pulley, with two objects of different mass attached. It is particularly useful in understanding the
connection between force and motion. In Figure 6.7, and Consider the pulley to be
frictionless. (a) If is released, what will its acceleration be? (b) What is the tension in the string?
FIGURE 6.7 An Atwood machine and free-body diagrams for each of the two blocks.
Strategy
We draw a free-body diagram for each mass separately, as shown in the figure. Then we analyze each diagram to
find the required unknowns. This may involve the solution of simultaneous equations. It is also important to note the
similarity with the previous example. As block 2 accelerates with acceleration in the downward direction, block 1
accelerates upward with acceleration . Thus,
Solution
a. We have
258 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
(The negative sign in front of indicates that accelerates downward; both blocks accelerate at the
same rate, but in opposite directions.) Solve the two equations simultaneously (subtract them) and the result
is
Solving for a:
b. Observing the first block, we see that
Significance
The result for the acceleration given in the solution can be interpreted as the ratio of the unbalanced force on the
system, , to the total mass of the system, . We can also use the Atwood machine to measure
local gravitational field strength.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.3
Determine a general formula in terms of machine shown above.
and g for calculating the tension in the string for the Atwood
Newton’s Laws of Motion and Kinematics
Physics is most interesting and most powerful when applied to general situations that involve more than a narrow
set of physical principles. Newton’s laws of motion can also be integrated with other concepts that have been
discussed previously in this text to solve problems of motion. For example, forces produce accelerations, a topic of
kinematics, and hence the relevance of earlier chapters.
When approaching problems that involve various types of forces, acceleration, velocity, and/or position, listing the
givens and the quantities to be calculated will allow you to identify the principles involved. Then, you can refer to the
chapters that deal with a particular topic and solve the problem using strategies outlined in the text. The following
worked example illustrates how the problem-solving strategy given earlier in this chapter, as well as strategies
presented in other chapters, is applied to an integrated concept problem.
EXAMPLE 6.6
What Force Must a Soccer Player Exert to Reach Top Speed?
A soccer player starts at rest and accelerates forward, reaching a velocity of 8.00 m/s in 2.50 s. (a) What is her
average acceleration? (b) What average force does the ground exert forward on the runner so that she achieves this
acceleration? The player’s mass is 70.0 kg, and air resistance is negligible.
Strategy
To find the answers to this problem, we use the problem-solving strategy given earlier in this chapter. The solutions
to each part of the example illustrate how to apply specific problem-solving steps. In this case, we do not need to
use all of the steps. We simply identify the physical principles, and thus the knowns and unknowns; apply Newton’s
second law; and check to see whether the answer is reasonable.
Solution
a. We are given the initial and final velocities (zero and 8.00 m/s forward); thus, the change in velocity is
. We are given the elapsed time, so The unknown is acceleration, which can be
found from its definition:
Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 259
Substituting the known values yields
b. Here we are asked to find the average force the ground exerts on the runner to produce this acceleration.
(Remember that we are dealing with the force or forces acting on the object of interest.) This is the reaction
force to that exerted by the player backward against the ground, by Newton’s third law. Neglecting air
resistance, this would be equal in magnitude to the net external force on the player, since this force causes her
acceleration. Since we now know the player’s acceleration and are given her mass, we can use Newton’s
second law to find the force exerted. That is,
Substituting the known values of m and a gives
This is a reasonable result: The acceleration is attainable for an athlete in good condition. The force is about 50
pounds, a reasonable average force.
Significance
This example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that include topics from different
chapters. The first step is to identify the physical principles, the knowns, and the unknowns involved in the problem.
The second step is to solve for the unknown, in this case using Newton’s second law. Finally, we check our answer to
ensure it is reasonable. These techniques for integrated concept problems will be useful in applications of physics
outside of a physics course, such as in your profession, in other science disciplines, and in everyday life.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.4
The soccer player stops after completing the play described above, but now notices that the ball is in position to be
stolen. If she now experiences a force of 126 N to attempt to steal the ball, which is 2.00 m away from her, how long
will it take her to get to the ball?
EXAMPLE 6.7
What Force Acts on a Model Helicopter?
A 1.50-kg model helicopter has a velocity of (2.00 s) after which it has a velocity of the helicopter during this time interval?
at Strategy
We can easily set up a coordinate system in which the x-axis vertical. We know that and acceleration by the definition; we can then apply Newton’s second law.
Solution
We have
It is accelerated at a constant rate for two seconds
What is the magnitude of the resultant force acting on
direction) is horizontal, and the y-axis direction) is
From this, we can calculate the
260 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
The magnitude of the force is now easily found:
Significance
The original problem was stated in terms of example with the previous example.
vector components, so we used vector methods. Compare this
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.5
Find the direction of the resultant for the 1.50-kg model helicopter.
EXAMPLE 6.8
Baggage Tractor
Figure 6.8(a) shows a baggage tractor pulling luggage carts from an airplane. The tractor has mass 650.0 kg, while
cart A has mass 250.0 kg and cart B has mass 150.0 kg. The driving force acting for a brief period of time
accelerates the system from rest and acts for 3.00 s. (a) If this driving force is given by find the
speed after 3.00 seconds. (b) What is the horizontal force acting on the connecting cable between the tractor and
cart A at this instant?
FIGURE 6.8 (a) A free-body diagram is shown, which indicates all the external forces on the system consisting of the tractor and baggage
carts for carrying airline luggage. (b) A free-body diagram of the tractor only is shown isolated in order to calculate the tension in the cable
to the carts.
Strategy
A free-body diagram shows the driving force of the tractor, which gives the system its acceleration. We only need to
consider motion in the horizontal direction. The vertical forces balance each other and it is not necessary to consider
them. For part b, we make use of a free-body diagram of the tractor alone to determine the force between it and cart
A. This exposes the coupling force which is our objective.
Solution
a. and so
Since acceleration is a function of time, we can determine the velocity of the tractor by using initial condition that at We integrate from to
with the
Access for free at openstax.org
6.1 • Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws 261
b. Refer to the free-body diagram in Figure 6.8(b).
Significance
Since the force varies with time, we must use calculus to solve this problem. Notice how the total mass of the
system was important in solving Figure 6.8(a), whereas only the mass of the truck (since it supplied the force) was of
use in Figure 6.8(b).
Recall that and . If acceleration is a function of time, we can use the calculus forms developed in
Motion Along a Straight Line, as shown in this example. However, sometimes acceleration is a function of
displacement. In this case, we can derive an important result from these calculus relations. Solving for dtin each,
we have and Now, equating these expressions, we have We can rearrange this to obtain
EXAMPLE 6.9
Motion of a Projectile Fired Vertically
A 10.0-kg mortar shell is fired vertically upward from the ground, with an initial velocity of 50.0 m/s (see Figure 6.9).
Determine the maximum height it will travel if atmospheric resistance is measured as where v
is the speed at any instant.
FIGURE 6.9 (a) The mortar fires a shell straight up; we consider the friction force provided by the air. (b) A free-body diagram is shown
which indicates all the forces on the mortar shell. (credit a: modification of work by OS541/DoD; The appearance of U.S. Department of
Defense (DoD) visual information does not imply or constitute DoD endorsement.)
Strategy
The known force on the mortar shell can be related to its acceleration using the equations of motion. Kinematics can
then be used to relate the mortar shell’s acceleration to its position.
262 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Solution
Initially, and At the maximum height The free-body diagram shows to act
downward, because it slows the upward motion of the mortar shell. Thus, we can write
The acceleration depends on v and is therefore variable. Since rearrangement described above,
we can relate a to v using the
We replace ds with dy because we are dealing with the vertical direction,
We now separate the variables (v’s and dv’s on one side; dy on the other):
Thus,
Significance
Notice the need to apply calculus since the force is not constant, which also means that acceleration is not constant.
To make matters worse, the force depends on v (not t ), and so we must use the trick explained prior to the example.
The answer for the height indicates a lower elevation if there were air resistance. We will deal with the effects of air
resistance and other drag forces in greater detail in Drag Force and Terminal Speed.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.6
If atmospheric resistance is neglected, find the maximum height for the mortar shell. Is calculus required for this
solution?
INTERACTIVE
Explore the forces at work in this simulation (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21forcesatwork) when you try to push a filing
cabinet. Create an applied force and see the resulting frictional force and total force acting on the cabinet. Charts
show the forces, position, velocity, and acceleration vs. time. View a free-body diagram of all the forces (including
gravitational and normal forces).
Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 • Friction 263
6.2 Friction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the general characteristics of friction
• List the various types of friction
• Calculate the magnitude of static and kinetic friction, and use these in problems involving Newton’s laws
of motion
When a body is in motion, it has resistance because the body interacts with its surroundings. This resistance is a
force of friction. Friction opposes relative motion between systems in contact but also allows us to move, a concept
that becomes obvious if you try to walk on ice. Friction is a common yet complex force, and its behavior still not
completely understood. Still, it is possible to understand the circumstances in which it behaves.
Static and Kinetic Friction
The basic definition of friction is relatively simple to state.
FRICTION
Friction is a force that opposes relative motion between systems in contact.
There are several forms of friction. One of the simpler characteristics of sliding friction is that it is parallel to the
contact surfaces between systems and is always in a direction that opposes motion or attempted motion of the
systems relative to each other. If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one another, then the friction
between them is called kinetic friction. For example, friction slows a hockey puck sliding on ice. When objects are
stationary, static friction can act between them; the static friction is usually greater than the kinetic friction between
two objects.
STATIC AND KINETIC FRICTION
If two systems are in contact and stationary relative to one another, then the friction between them is called
static friction. If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one another, then the friction between them
is called kinetic friction.
Imagine, for example, trying to slide a heavy crate across a concrete floor—you might push very hard on the crate
and not move it at all. This means that the static friction responds to what you do—it increases to be equal to and in
the opposite direction of your push. If you finally push hard enough, the crate seems to slip suddenly and starts to
move. Now static friction gives way to kinetic friction. Once in motion, it is easier to keep it in motion than it was to
get it started, indicating that the kinetic frictional force is less than the static frictional force. If you add mass to the
crate, say by placing a box on top of it, you need to push even harder to get it started and also to keep it moving.
Furthermore, if you oiled the concrete you would find it easier to get the crate started and keep it going (as you
might expect).
Figure 6.10 is a crude pictorial representation of how friction occurs at the interface between two objects. Close-up
inspection of these surfaces shows them to be rough. Thus, when you push to get an object moving (in this case, a
crate), you must raise the object until it can skip along with just the tips of the surface hitting, breaking off the
points, or both. A considerable force can be resisted by friction with no apparent motion. The harder the surfaces
are pushed together (such as if another box is placed on the crate), the more force is needed to move them. Part of
the friction is due to adhesive forces between the surface molecules of the two objects, which explains the
dependence of friction on the nature of the substances. For example, rubber-soled shoes slip less than those with
leather soles. Adhesion varies with substances in contact and is a complicated aspect of surface physics. Once an
object is moving, there are fewer points of contact (fewer molecules adhering), so less force is required to keep the
object moving. At small but nonzero speeds, friction is nearly independent of speed.
264 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.10 Frictional forces, such as always oppose motion or attempted motion between objects in contact. Friction arises in part
because of the roughness of the surfaces in contact, as seen in the expanded view. For the object to move, it must rise to where the peaks
of the top surface can skip along the bottom surface. Thus, a force is required just to set the object in motion. Some of the peaks will be
broken off, also requiring a force to maintain motion. Much of the friction is actually due to attractive forces between molecules making up
the two objects, so that even perfectly smooth surfaces are not friction-free. (In fact, perfectly smooth, clean surfaces of similar materials
would adhere, forming a bond called a “cold weld.”)
The magnitude of the frictional force has two forms: one for static situations (static friction), the other for situations
involving motion (kinetic friction). What follows is an approximate empirical (experimentally determined) model
only. These equations for static and kinetic friction are not vector equations.
MAGNITUDE OF STATIC FRICTION
The magnitude of static friction is
6.1
where is the coefficient of static friction and Nis the magnitude of the normal force.
The symbol means less than or equal t o, implying that static friction can have a maximum value of Static
friction is a responsive force that increases to be equal and opposite to whatever force is exerted, up to its maximum
limit. Once the applied force exceeds
the object moves. Thus,
MAGNITUDE OF KINETIC FRICTION
The magnitude of kinetic friction is given by
6.2
where is the coefficient of kinetic friction.
A system in which friction to kinetic friction is illustrated in Figure 6.11.
is described as a system in which friction behaves simpl y. The transition from static
Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 • Friction 265
FIGURE 6.11 (a) The force of friction between the block and the rough surface opposes the direction of the applied force The
magnitude of the static friction balances that of the applied force. This is shown in the left side of the graph in (c). (b) At some point, the
magnitude of the applied force is greater than the force of kinetic friction, and the block moves to the right. This is shown in the right side of
the graph. (c) The graph of the frictional force versus the applied force; note that This means that
As you can see in Table 6.1, the coefficients of kinetic friction are less than their static counterparts. The
approximate values of are stated to only one or two digits to indicate the approximate description of friction given
by the preceding two equations.
System Static Friction Kinetic Friction
Rubber on dry concrete 1.0 0.7
Rubber on wet concrete 0.5-0.7 0.3-0.5
Wood on wood 0.5 0.3
Waxed wood on wet snow 0.14 0.1
Metal on wood 0.5 0.3
Steel on steel (dry) 0.6 0.3
Steel on steel (oiled) 0.05 0.03
Teflon on steel 0.04 0.04
Bone lubricated by synovial fluid 0.016 0.015
Shoes on wood 0.9 0.7
Shoes on ice 0.1 0.05
Ice on ice 0.1 0.03
Steel on ice 0.04 0.02
TABLE 6.1 Approximate Coefficients of Static and Kinetic Friction
266 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Equation 6.1 and Equation 6.2 include the dependence of friction on materials and the normal force. The direction of
friction is always opposite that of motion, parallel to the surface between objects, and perpendicular to the normal
force. For example, if the crate you try to push (with a force parallel to the floor) has a mass of 100 kg, then the
normal force is equal to its weight,
perpendicular to the floor. If the coefficient of static friction is 0.45, you would have to exert a force parallel to the
floor greater than
to move the crate. Once there is motion, friction is less and the coefficient of kinetic friction might be 0.30, so that a
force of only
keeps it moving at a constant speed. If the floor is lubricated, both coefficients are considerably less than they
would be without lubrication. Coefficient of friction is a unitless quantity with a magnitude usually between 0 and
1.0. The actual value depends on the two surfaces that are in contact.
Many people have experienced the slipperiness of walking on ice. However, many parts of the body, especially the
joints, have much smaller coefficients of friction—often three or four times less than ice. A joint is formed by the
ends of two bones, which are connected by thick tissues. The knee joint is formed by the lower leg bone (the tibia)
and the thighbone (the femur). The hip is a ball (at the end of the femur) and socket (part of the pelvis) joint. The
ends of the bones in the joint are covered by cartilage, which provides a smooth, almost-glassy surface. The joints
also produce a fluid (synovial fluid) that reduces friction and wear. A damaged or arthritic joint can be replaced by an
artificial joint (Figure 6.12). These replacements can be made of metals (stainless steel or titanium) or plastic
(polyethylene), also with very small coefficients of friction.
FIGURE 6.12 Artificial knee replacement is a procedure that has been performed for more than 20 years. These post-operative X-rays show
a right knee joint replacement. (credit: modification of work by Mike Baird)
Natural lubricants include saliva produced in our mouths to aid in the swallowing process, and the slippery mucus
found between organs in the body, allowing them to move freely past each other during heartbeats, during
breathing, and when a person moves. Hospitals and doctor’s clinics commonly use artificial lubricants, such as gels,
to reduce friction.
The equations given for static and kinetic friction are empirical laws that describe the behavior of the forces of
friction. While these formulas are very useful for practical purposes, they do not have the status of mathematical
statements that represent general principles (e.g., Newton’s second law). In fact, there are cases for which these
equations are not even good approximations. For instance, neither formula is accurate for lubricated surfaces or for
two surfaces sliding across each other at high speeds. Unless specified, we will not be concerned with these
exceptions.
Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 • Friction 267
EXAMPLE 6.10
Static and Kinetic Friction
A 20.0-kg crate is at rest on a floor as shown in Figure 6.13. The coefficient of static friction between the crate and
floor is 0.700 and the coefficient of kinetic friction is 0.600. A horizontal force is applied to the crate. Find the
force of friction if (a) (b) (c) and (d)
FIGURE 6.13 (a) A crate on a horizontal surface is pushed with a force or the kinetic frictional force.
(b) The forces on the crate. Here, may represent either the static
Strategy
The free-body diagram of the crate is shown in Figure 6.13(b). We apply Newton’s second law in the horizontal and
vertical directions, including the friction force in opposition to the direction of motion of the box.
Solution
Newton’s second law GIVES
Here we are using the symbol fto represent the frictional force since we have not yet determined whether the crate
is subject to station friction or kinetic friction. We do this whenever we are unsure what type of friction is acting.
Now the weight of the crate is
which is also equal to N . The maximum force of static friction is therefore less than 137 N, the force of static friction keeps the crate stationary and and (c)
Thus, (a) As long as (b)
is
(d) If the applied force is greater than the maximum force of static friction (137 N), so the crate can no
longer remain at rest. Once the crate is in motion, kinetic friction acts. Then
and the acceleration is
Significance
This example illustrates how we consider friction in a dynamics problem. Notice that static friction has a value that
268 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
matches the applied force, until we reach the maximum value of static friction. Also, no motion can occur until the
applied force equals the force of static friction, but the force of kinetic friction will then become smaller.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.7
A block of mass 1.0 kg rests on a horizontal surface. The frictional coefficients for the block and surface are
and (a) What is the minimum horizontal force required to move the block? (b) What is the
block’s acceleration when this force is applied?
Friction and the Inclined Plane
One situation where friction plays an obvious role is that of an object on a slope. It might be a crate being pushed up
a ramp to a loading dock or a skateboarder coasting down a mountain, but the basic physics is the same. We usually
generalize the sloping surface and call it an inclined plane but then pretend that the surface is flat. Let’s look at an
example of analyzing motion on an inclined plane with friction.
EXAMPLE 6.11
Downhill Skier
A skier with a mass of 62 kg is sliding down a snowy slope at a constant acceleration. Find the coefficient of kinetic
friction for the skier if friction is known to be 45.0 N.
Strategy
The magnitude of kinetic friction is given as 45.0 N. Kinetic friction is related to the normal force by ;
thus, we can find the coefficient of kinetic friction if we can find the normal force on the skier. The normal force is
always perpendicular to the surface, and since there is no motion perpendicular to the surface, the normal force
should equal the component of the skier’s weight perpendicular to the slope. (See Figure 6.14, which repeats a
figure from the chapter on Newton’s laws of motion.)
FIGURE 6.14 The motion of the skier and friction are parallel to the slope, so it is most convenient to project all forces onto a coordinate
system where one axis is parallel to the slope and the other is perpendicular (axes shown to left of skier). The normal force is
perpendicular to the slope, and friction is parallel to the slope, but the skier’s weight has components along both axes, namely The normal force is equal in magnitude to so there is no motion perpendicular to the slope.
and
We have
Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 • Friction 269
Substituting this into our expression for kinetic friction, we obtain
which can now be solved for the coefficient of kinetic friction
Solution
Solving for gives
Substituting known values on the right-hand side of the equation,
Significance
This result is a little smaller than the coefficient listed in Table 6.1 for waxed wood on snow, but it is still reasonable
since values of the coefficients of friction can vary greatly. In situations like this, where an object of mass m slides
down a slope that makes an angle with the horizontal, friction is given by All objects slide down
a slope with constant acceleration under these circumstances.
We have discussed that when an object rests on a horizontal surface, the normal force supporting it is equal in
magnitude to its weight. Furthermore, simple friction is always proportional to the normal force. When an object is
not on a horizontal surface, as with the inclined plane, we must find the force acting on the object that is directed
perpendicular to the surface; it is a component of the weight.
We now derive a useful relationship for calculating coefficient of friction on an inclined plane. Notice that the result
applies only for situations in which the object slides at constant speed down the ramp.
An object slides down an inclined plane at a constant velocity if the net force on the object is zero. We can use this
fact to measure the coefficient of kinetic friction between two objects. As shown in Example 6.11, the kinetic friction
on a slope is . The component of the weight down the slope is equal to (see the free-body
diagram in Figure 6.14). These forces act in opposite directions, so when they have equal magnitude, the
acceleration is zero. Writing these out,
Solving for we find that
Put a coin on a book and tilt it until the coin slides at a constant velocity down the book. You might need to tap the
book lightly to get the coin to move. Measure the angle of tilt relative to the horizontal and find Note that the
coin does not start to slide at all until an angle greater than is attained, since the coefficient of static friction is
larger than the coefficient of kinetic friction. Think about how this may affect the value for and its uncertainty.
Atomic-Scale Explanations of Friction
The simpler aspects of friction dealt with so far are its macroscopic (large-scale) characteristics. Great strides have
been made in the atomic-scale explanation of friction during the past several decades. Researchers are finding that
the atomic nature of friction seems to have several fundamental characteristics. These characteristics not only
explain some of the simpler aspects of friction—they also hold the potential for the development of nearly friction-
free environments that could save hundreds of billions of dollars in energy which is currently being converted
(unnecessarily) into heat.
Figure 6.15 illustrates one macroscopic characteristic of friction that is explained by microscopic (small-scale)
270 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
research. We have noted that friction is proportional to the normal force, but not to the amount of area in contact, a
somewhat counterintuitive notion. When two rough surfaces are in contact, the actual contact area is a tiny fraction
of the total area because only high spots touch. When a greater normal force is exerted, the actual contact area
increases, and we find that the friction is proportional to this area.
FIGURE 6.15 Two rough surfaces in contact have a much smaller area of actual contact than their total area. When the normal force is
larger as a result of a larger applied force, the area of actual contact increases, as does friction.
However, the atomic-scale view promises to explain far more than the simpler features of friction. The mechanism
for how heat is generated is now being determined. In other words, why do surfaces get warmer when rubbed?
Essentially, atoms are linked with one another to form lattices. When surfaces rub, the surface atoms adhere and
cause atomic lattices to vibrate—essentially creating sound waves that penetrate the material. The sound waves
diminish with distance, and their energy is converted into heat. Chemical reactions that are related to frictional wear
can also occur between atoms and molecules on the surfaces. Figure 6.16 shows how the tip of a probe drawn
across another material is deformed by atomic-scale friction. The force needed to drag the tip can be measured and
is found to be related to shear stress, which is discussed in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity. The variation in shear
stress is remarkable (more than a factor of ) and difficult to predict theoretically, but shear stress is yielding a
fundamental understanding of a large-scale phenomenon known since ancient times—friction.
FIGURE 6.16 The tip of a probe is deformed sideways by frictional force as the probe is dragged across a surface. Measurements of how the
force varies for different materials are yielding fundamental insights into the atomic nature of friction.
INTERACTIVE
Engaging the simulation below, describe a model for friction on a molecular level. Describe matter in terms of
molecular motion. The description should include diagrams to support the description; how the temperature affects
the image; what are the differences and similarities between solid, liquid, and gas particle motion; and how the size
and speed of gas molecules relate to everyday objects.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/6-2-friction)
Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 • Friction 271
EXAMPLE 6.12
Sliding Blocks
The two blocks of Figure 6.17 are attached to each other by a massless string that is wrapped around a frictionless
pulley. When the bottom 4.00-kg block is pulled to the left by the constant force the top 2.00-kg block slides
across it to the right. Find the magnitude of the force necessary to move the blocks at constant speed. Assume that
the coefficient of kinetic friction between all surfaces is 0.400.
FIGURE 6.17 (a) Each block moves at constant velocity. (b) Free-body diagrams for the blocks.
Strategy
We analyze the motions of the two blocks separately. The top block is subjected to a contact force exerted by the
bottom block. The components of this force are the normal force and the frictional force Other
forces on the top block are the tension in the string and the weight of the top block itself, 19.6 N. The bottom
block is subjected to contact forces due to the top block and due to the floor. The first contact force has components
and which are simply reaction forces to the contact forces that the bottom block exerts on the top
block. The components of the contact force of the floor are and Other forces on this block are the
tension and the weight –39.2 N.
Solution
Since the top block is moving horizontally to the right at constant velocity, its acceleration is zero in both the
horizontal and the vertical directions. From Newton’s second law,
Solving for the two unknowns, we obtain and accelerating, so the application of Newton’s second law to this block gives
The bottom block is also not
The values of second set of equations, we can determine and Twere found with the first set of equations. When these values are substituted into the
and P . They are
272 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Significance
Understanding what direction in which to draw the friction force is often troublesome. Notice that each friction force
labeled in Figure 6.17 acts in the direction opposite the motion of its corresponding block.
EXAMPLE 6.13
A Crate on an Accelerating Truck
A 50.0-kg crate rests on the bed of a truck as shown in Figure 6.18. The coefficients of friction between the surfaces
are and Find the frictional force on the crate when the truck is accelerating forward relative
to the ground at (a) 2.00 m/s2, and (b) 5.00 m/s2
.
FIGURE 6.18 (a) A crate rests on the bed of the truck that is accelerating forward. (b) The free-body diagram of the crate.
Strategy
The forces on the crate are its weight and the normal and frictional forces due to contact with the truck bed. We
start by assuming that the crate is not slipping. In this case, the static frictional force acts on the crate.
Furthermore, the accelerations of the crate and the truck are equal.
Solution
a. Application of Newton’s second law to the crate, using the reference frame attached to the ground, yields
We can now check the validity of our no-slip assumption. The maximum value of the force of static friction is
b. whereas the actualforce of static friction that acts when the truck accelerates forward at Thus, the assumption of no slipping is valid.
If the crate is to move with the truck when it accelerates at the force of static friction must be
is only
Since this exceeds the maximum of 196 N, the crate must slip. The frictional force is therefore kinetic and is
The horizontal acceleration of the crate relative to the ground is now found from
Access for free at openstax.org
6.2 • Friction 273
Significance
Relative to the ground, the truck is accelerating forward at and the crate is accelerating forward at
. Hence the crate is sliding backward relative to the bed of the truck with an acceleration
EXAMPLE 6.14
Snowboarding
Earlier, we analyzed the situation of a downhill skier moving at constant velocity to determine the coefficient of
kinetic friction. Now let’s do a similar analysis to determine acceleration. The snowboarder of Figure 6.19 glides
down a slope that is inclined at 13° to the horizontal. The coefficient of kinetic friction between the board and the
snow is What is the acceleration of the snowboarder?
FIGURE 6.19 (a) A snowboarder glides down a slope inclined at 13° to the horizontal. (b) The free-body diagram of the snowboarder.
Strategy
The forces acting on the snowboarder are her weight and the contact force of the slope, which has a component
normal to the incline and a component along the incline (force of kinetic friction). Because she moves along the
slope, the most convenient reference frame for analyzing her motion is one with the x-axis along and the y-axis
perpendicular to the incline. In this frame, both the normal and the frictional forces lie along coordinate axes, the
components of the weight are , and the only
acceleration is along the x-axis
Solution
We can now apply Newton’s second law to the snowboarder:
From the second equation, Upon substituting this into the first equation, we find
Significance
Notice from this equation that if is small enough or is large enough, is negative, that is, the snowboarder
274 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
slows down.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.8
The snowboarder is now moving down a hill with incline . What is the snowboarder's acceleration?
6.3 Centripetal Force
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the equation for centripetal acceleration
• Apply Newton’s second law to develop the equation for centripetal force
• Use circular motion concepts in solving problems involving Newton’s laws of motion
In Motion in Two and Three Dimensions, we examined the basic concepts of circular motion. An object undergoing
circular motion, like one of the race cars shown at the beginning of this chapter, must be accelerating because it is
changing the direction of its velocity. We proved that this centrally directed acceleration, called centripetal
acceleration, is given by the formula
where v is the velocity of the object, directed along a tangent line to the curve at any instant. If we know the angular
velocity , then we can use
Angular velocity gives the rate at which the object is turning through the curve, in units of rad/s. This acceleration
acts along the radius of the curved path and is thus also referred to as a radial acceleration.
An acceleration must be produced by a force. Any force or combination of forces can cause a centripetal or radial
acceleration. Just a few examples are the tension in the rope on a tether ball, the force of Earth’s gravity on the
Moon, friction between roller skates and a rink floor, a banked roadway’s force on a car, and forces on the tube of a
spinning centrifuge. Any net force causing uniform circular motion is called a centripetal force. The direction of a
centripetal force is toward the center of curvature, the same as the direction of centripetal acceleration. According
to Newton’s second law of motion, net force is mass times acceleration: For uniform circular motion, the
acceleration is the centripetal acceleration:
.
Thus, the magnitude of centripetal force is
By substituting the expressions for centripetal acceleration centripetal force in terms of mass, velocity, angular velocity, and radius of curvature:
we get two expressions for the
6.3
You may use whichever expression for centripetal force is more convenient. Centripetal force perpendicular to the path and points to the center of curvature, because points to the center of curvature. Note that if you solve the first expression for r, you get
is always
is perpendicular to the velocity and
This implies that for a given mass and velocity, a large centripetal force causes a small radius of curvature—that is, a
tight curve, as in Figure 6.20.
Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 • Centripetal Force 275
FIGURE 6.20 The frictional force supplies the centripetal force and is numerically equal to it. Centripetal force is perpendicular to velocity
and causes uniform circular motion. The larger the the smaller the radius of curvature r and the sharper the curve. The second curve
has the same v, but a larger produces a smaller r′
.
EXAMPLE 6.15
What Coefficient of Friction Do Cars Need on a Flat Curve?
(a) Calculate the centripetal force exerted on a 900.0-kg car that negotiates a 500.0-m radius curve at 25.00 m/s.
(b) Assuming an unbanked curve, find the minimum static coefficient of friction between the tires and the road,
static friction being the reason that keeps the car from slipping (Figure 6.21).
FIGURE 6.21 This car on level ground is moving away and turning to the left. The centripetal force causing the car to turn in a circular path
is due to friction between the tires and the road. A minimum coefficient of friction is needed, or the car will move in a larger-radius curve
and leave the roadway.
276 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Strategy
a. We know that Thus,
b. Figure 6.21 shows the forces acting on the car on an unbanked (level ground) curve. Friction is to the left,
keeping the car from slipping, and because it is the only horizontal force acting on the car, the friction is the
centripetal force in this case. We know that the maximum static friction (at which the tires roll but do not slip)
is where is the static coefficient of friction and Nis the normal force. The normal force equals the
car’s weight on level ground, so Thus the centripetal force in this situation is
Now we have a relationship between centripetal force and the coefficient of friction. Using the equation
we obtain
We solve this for noting that mass cancels, and obtain
Substituting the knowns,
(Because coefficients of friction are approximate, the answer is given to only two digits.)
Significance
The coefficient of friction found in Figure 6.21(b) is much smaller than is typically found between tires and roads.
The car still negotiates the curve if the coefficient is greater than 0.13, because static friction is a responsive force,
able to assume a value less than but no more than A higher coefficient would also allow the car to negotiate
the curve at a higher speed, but if the coefficient of friction is less, the safe speed would be less than 25 m/s. Note
that mass cancels, implying that, in this example, it does not matter how heavily loaded the car is to negotiate the
turn. Mass cancels because friction is assumed proportional to the normal force, which in turn is proportional to
mass. If the surface of the road were banked, the normal force would be greater, as discussed next.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.9
A car moving at 96.8 km/h travels around a circular curve of radius 182.9 m on a flat country road. What must be the
minimum coefficient of static friction to keep the car from slipping?
Banked Curves
Let us now consider banked curves, where the slope of the road helps you negotiate the curve (Figure 6.22). The
greater the angle , the faster you can take the curve. Race tracks for bikes as well as cars, for example, often have
steeply banked curves. In an “ideally banked curve,” the angle is such that you can negotiate the curve at a certain
speed without the aid of friction between the tires and the road. We will derive an expression for for an ideally
banked curve and consider an example related to it.
Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 • Centripetal Force 277
FIGURE 6.22 The car on this banked curve is moving away and turning to the left.
For ideal banking, the net external force equals the horizontal centripetal force in the absence of friction. The
components of the normal force Nin the horizontal and vertical directions must equal the centripetal force and the
weight of the car, respectively. In cases in which forces are not parallel, it is most convenient to consider
components along perpendicular axes—in this case, the vertical and horizontal directions.
Figure 6.22 shows a free-body diagram for a car on a frictionless banked curve. If the angle is ideal for the speed
and radius, then the net external force equals the necessary centripetal force. The only two external forces acting on
the car are its weight and the normal force of the road (A frictionless surface can only exert a force
perpendicular to the surface—that is, a normal force.) These two forces must add to give a net external force that is
horizontal toward the center of curvature and has magnitude Because this is the crucial force and it is
horizontal, we use a coordinate system with vertical and horizontal axes. Only the normal force has a horizontal
component, so this must equal the centripetal force, that is,
Because the car does not leave the surface of the road, the net vertical force must be zero, meaning that the vertical
components of the two external forces must be equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. From Figure 6.22, we
see that the vertical component of the normal force is and the only other vertical force is the car’s weight.
These must be equal in magnitude; thus,
Now we can combine these two equations to eliminate Nand get an expression for equation for and substituting this into the first yields
, as desired. Solving the second
Taking the inverse tangent gives
6.4
This expression can be understood by considering how depends on v and r. A large is obtained for a large v and a
small r . That is, roads must be steeply banked for high speeds and sharp curves. Friction helps, because it allows
you to take the curve at greater or lower speed than if the curve were frictionless. Note that does not depend on
the mass of the vehicle.
278 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
EXAMPLE 6.16
What Is the Ideal Speed to Take a Steeply Banked Tight Curve?
Curves on some test tracks and race courses, such as Daytona International Speedway in Florida, are very steeply
banked. This banking, with the aid of tire friction and very stable car configurations, allows the curves to be taken at
very high speed. To illustrate, calculate the speed at which a 100.0-m radius curve banked at should be driven
if the road were frictionless.
Strategy
We first note that all terms in the expression for the ideal angle of a banked curve except for speed are known; thus,
we need only rearrange it so that speed appears on the left-hand side and then substitute known quantities.
Solution
Starting with
we get
Noting that we obtain
Significance
This is just about 87.5 km/h, consistent with a very steeply banked and rather sharp curve. Tire friction enables a
vehicle to take the curve at significantly higher speeds.
Airplanes also make turns by banking. The lift force, due to the force of the air on the wing, acts at right angles to the
wing. When the airplane banks, the pilot is obtaining greater lift than necessary for level flight. The vertical
component of lift balances the airplane’s weight, and the horizontal component accelerates the plane. The banking
angle shown in Figure 6.23 is given by . We analyze the forces in the same way we treat the case of the car
rounding a banked curve.
FIGURE 6.23 In a banked turn, the horizontal component of lift is unbalanced and accelerates the plane. The normal component of lift
balances the plane’s weight. The banking angle is given by . Compare the vector diagram with that shown in Figure 6.22.
Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 • Centripetal Force 279
INTERACTIVE
Join the ladybug (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ladybug_es) in an exploration of rotational motion. Rotate the merry-go-
round to change its angle or choose a constant angular velocity or angular acceleration. Explore how circular motion
relates to the bug’s xy-position, velocity, and acceleration using vectors or graphs.
INTERACTIVE
A circular motion requires a force, the so-called centripetal force, which is directed to the axis of rotation. This
simplified model of a carousel (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21carousel) demonstrates this force.
Inertial Forces and Noninertial (Accelerated) Frames: The Coriolis Force
What do taking off in a jet airplane, turning a corner in a car, riding a merry-go-round, and the circular motion of a
tropical cyclone have in common? Each exhibits inertial forces—fictitious forces that merely seem to arise from
motion, because the observer’s frame of reference is accelerating or rotating. When taking off in a jet, most people
would agree it feels as if you are being pushed back into the seat as the airplane accelerates down the runway. Yet a
physicist would say that you tend to remain stationary while the seatpushes forward on you. An even more common
experience occurs when you make a tight curve in your car—say, to the right (Figure 6.24). You feel as if you are
thrown (that is, f orced ) toward the left relative to the car. Again, a physicist would say that you are going in a straight
line (recall Newton’s first law) but the car moves to the right, not that you are experiencing a force from the left.
FIGURE 6.24 (a) The car driver feels herself forced to the left relative to the car when she makes a right turn. This is a fictitious inertial force
arising from the use of the car as a frame of reference. (b) In Earth’s frame of reference, the driver moves in a straight line, obeying
Newton’s first law, and the car moves to the right. There is no force to the left on the driver relative to Earth. Instead, there is a force to the
right on the car to make it turn.
We can reconcile these points of view by examining the frames of reference used. Let us concentrate on people in a
car. Passengers instinctively use the car as a frame of reference, whereas a physicist might use Earth. The physicist
might make this choice because Earth is nearly an inertial frame of reference, in which all forces have an identifiable
physical origin. In such a frame of reference, Newton’s laws of motion take the form given in Newton’s Laws of
Motion. The car is a noninertial frame of reference because it is accelerated to the side. The force to the left sensed
by car passengers is an inertial force having no physical origin (it is due purely to the inertia of the passenger, not to
some physical cause such as tension, friction, or gravitation). The car, as well as the driver, is actually accelerating to
the right.
A physicist will choose whatever reference frame is most convenient for the situation being analyzed. There is no
problem to a physicist in including inertial forces and Newton’s second law, as usual, if that is more convenient, for
280 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
example, on a merry-go-round or on a rotating planet. Noninertial (accelerated) frames of reference are used when
it is useful to do so. Different frames of reference must be considered in discussing the motion of an astronaut in a
spacecraft traveling at speeds near the speed of light, as you will appreciate in the study of the special theory of
relativity.
Let us now take a mental ride on a merry-go-round—specifically, a rapidly rotating playground merry-go-round
(Figure 6.25). You take the merry-go-round to be your frame of reference because you rotate together. When
rotating in that noninertial frame of reference, you feel an inertial force that tends to throw you off; this is often
referred to as a centrifug al f orce (not to be confused with centripetal force). Centrifugal force is a commonly used
term, but it does not actually exist. You must hang on tightly to counteract your inertia (which people often refer to
as centrifugal force). In Earth’s frame of reference, there is no force trying to throw you off; we emphasize that
centrifugal force is a fiction. You must hang on to make yourself go in a circle because otherwise you would go in a
straight line, right off the merry-go-round, in keeping with Newton’s first law. But the force you exert acts toward the
center of the circle.
FIGURE 6.25 (a) A rider on a merry-go-round feels as if he is being thrown off. This inertial force is sometimes mistakenly called the
centrifugal force in an effort to explain the rider’s motion in the rotating frame of reference. (b) In an inertial frame of reference and
according to Newton’s laws, it is his inertia that carries him off (the unshaded rider has and heads in a straight line). A force,
, is needed to cause a circular path.
This inertial effect, carrying you away from the center of rotation if there is no centripetal force to cause circular
motion, is put to good use in centrifuges (Figure 6.26). A centrifuge spins a sample very rapidly, as mentioned earlier
in this chapter. Viewed from the rotating frame of reference, the inertial force throws particles outward, hastening
their sedimentation. The greater the angular velocity, the greater the centrifugal force. But what really happens is
that the inertia of the particles carries them along a line tangent to the circle while the test tube is forced in a
circular path by a centripetal force.
Access for free at openstax.org
6.3 • Centripetal Force 281
FIGURE 6.26 Centrifuges use inertia to perform their task. Particles in the fluid sediment settle out because their inertia carries them away
from the center of rotation. The large angular velocity of the centrifuge quickens the sedimentation. Ultimately, the particles come into
contact with the test tube walls, which then supply the centripetal force needed to make them move in a circle of constant radius.
Let us now consider what happens if something moves in a rotating frame of reference. For example, what if you
slide a ball directly away from the center of the merry-go-round, as shown in Figure 6.27? The ball follows a straight
path relative to Earth (assuming negligible friction) and a path curved to the right on the merry-go-round’s surface. A
person standing next to the merry-go-round sees the ball moving straight and the merry-go-round rotating
underneath it. In the merry-go-round’s frame of reference, we explain the apparent curve to the right by using an
inertial force, called the Coriolis force, which causes the ball to curve to the right. The Coriolis force can be used by
anyone in that frame of reference to explain why objects follow curved paths and allows us to apply Newton’s laws
in noninertial frames of reference.
FIGURE 6.27 Looking down on the counterclockwise rotation of a merry-go-round, we see that a ball slid straight toward the edge follows a
path curved to the right. The person slides the ball toward point B , starting at point A . Both points rotate to the shaded positions (A ’ and B ’)
shown in the time that the ball follows the curved path in the rotating frame and a straight path in Earth’s frame.
Up until now, we have considered Earth to be an inertial frame of reference with little or no worry about effects due
to its rotation. Yet such effects do exist—in the rotation of weather systems, for example. Most consequences of
Earth’s rotation can be qualitatively understood by analogy with the merry-go-round. Viewed from above the North
Pole, Earth rotates counterclockwise, as does the merry-go-round in Figure 6.27. As on the merry-go-round, any
motion in Earth’s Northern Hemisphere experiences a Coriolis force to the right. Just the opposite occurs in the
Southern Hemisphere; there, the force is to the left. Because Earth’s angular velocity is small, the Coriolis force is
usually negligible, but for large-scale motions, such as wind patterns, it has substantial effects.
282 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
The Coriolis force causes hurricanes in the Northern Hemisphere to rotate in the counterclockwise direction,
whereas tropical cyclones in the Southern Hemisphere rotate in the clockwise direction. (The terms hurricane,
typhoon, and tropical storm are regionally specific names for cyclones, which are storm systems characterized by
low pressure centers, strong winds, and heavy rains.) Figure 6.28 helps show how these rotations take place. Air
flows toward any region of low pressure, and tropical cyclones contain particularly low pressures. Thus winds flow
toward the center of a tropical cyclone or a low-pressure weather system at the surface. In the Northern
Hemisphere, these inward winds are deflected to the right, as shown in the figure, producing a counterclockwise
circulation at the surface for low-pressure zones of any type. Low pressure at the surface is associated with rising
air, which also produces cooling and cloud formation, making low-pressure patterns quite visible from space.
Conversely, wind circulation around high-pressure zones is clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere but is less visible
because high pressure is associated with sinking air, producing clear skies.
FIGURE 6.28 (a) The counterclockwise rotation of this Northern Hemisphere hurricane is a major consequence of the Coriolis force. (b)
Without the Coriolis force, air would flow straight into a low-pressure zone, such as that found in tropical cyclones. (c) The Coriolis force
deflects the winds to the right, producing a counterclockwise rotation. (d) Wind flowing away from a high-pressure zone is also deflected to
the right, producing a clockwise rotation. (e) The opposite direction of rotation is produced by the Coriolis force in the Southern
Hemisphere, leading to tropical cyclones. (credit a and credit e: modifications of work by NASA)
The rotation of tropical cyclones and the path of a ball on a merry-go-round can just as well be explained by inertia
and the rotation of the system underneath. When noninertial frames are used, inertial forces, such as the Coriolis
force, must be invented to explain the curved path. There is no identifiable physical source for these inertial forces.
In an inertial frame, inertia explains the path, and no force is found to be without an identifiable source. Either view
allows us to describe nature, but a view in an inertial frame is the simplest in the sense that all forces have origins
and explanations.
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express the drag force mathematically
• Describe applications of the drag force
• Define terminal velocity
• Determine an object’s terminal velocity given its mass
Another interesting force in everyday life is the force of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid (either a gas or
a liquid). You feel the drag force when you move your hand through water. You might also feel it if you move your
Access for free at openstax.org
6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 283
hand during a strong wind. The faster you move your hand, the harder it is to move. You feel a smaller drag force
when you tilt your hand so only the side goes through the air—you have decreased the area of your hand that faces
the direction of motion.
Drag Forces
Like friction, the drag force always opposes the motion of an object. Unlike simple friction, the drag force is
proportional to some function of the velocity of the object in that fluid. This functionality is complicated and
depends upon the shape of the object, its size, its velocity, and the fluid it is in. For most large objects such as
cyclists, cars, and baseballs not moving too slowly, the magnitude of the drag force is proportional to the square
of the speed of the object. We can write this relationship mathematically as When taking into account
other factors, this relationship becomes
6.5
where Cis the drag coefficient, Ais the area of the object facing the fluid, and is the density of the fluid. (Recall
that density is mass per unit volume.) This equation can also be written in a more generalized fashion as
where bis a constant equivalent to We have set the exponent n for these equations as 2 because when an
object is moving at high velocity through air, the magnitude of the drag force is proportional to the square of the
speed. As we shall see in Fluid Mechanics, for small particles moving at low speeds in a fluid, the exponent n is
equal to 1.
DRAG FORCE
Drag force is proportional to the square of the speed of the object. Mathematically,
where Cis the drag coefficient, Ais the area of the object facing the fluid, and is the density of the fluid.
Athletes as well as car designers seek to reduce the drag force to lower their race times (Figure 6.29). Aerodynamic
shaping of an automobile can reduce the drag force and thus increase a car’s gas mileage.
FIGURE 6.29 From racing cars to bobsled racers, aerodynamic shaping is crucial to achieving top speeds. Bobsleds are designed for speed
and are shaped like a bullet with tapered fins. (credit: “U.S. Army”/Wikimedia Commons)
The value of the drag coefficient Cis determined empirically, usually with the use of a wind tunnel (Figure 6.30).
284 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
FIGURE 6.30 NASA researchers test a model plane in a wind tunnel. (credit: NASA/Ames)
The drag coefficient can depend upon velocity, but we assume that it is a constant here. Table 6.2 lists some typical
drag coefficients for a variety of objects. Notice that the drag coefficient is a dimensionless quantity. At highway
speeds, over of the power of a car is used to overcome air drag. The most fuel-efficient cruising speed is about
70–80 km/h (about 45–50 mi/h). For this reason, during the 1970s oil crisis in the United States, maximum speeds
on highways were set at about 90 km/h (55 mi/h).
Object C
Airfoil 0.05
Toyota Camry 0.28
Ford Focus 0.32
Honda Civic 0.36
Ferrari Testarossa 0.37
Dodge Ram Pickup 0.43
Sphere 0.45
Hummer H2 SUV 0.64
Skydiver (feet first) 0.70
TABLE 6.2 Typical Values of Drag
Coefficient C
Access for free at openstax.org
6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 285
Object C
Bicycle 0.90
Skydiver (horizontal) 1.0
Circular flat plate 1.12
TABLE 6.2 Typical Values of Drag
Coefficient C
Substantial research is under way in the sporting world to minimize drag. The dimples on golf balls are being
redesigned, as are the clothes that athletes wear. Bicycle racers and some swimmers and runners wear full
bodysuits. Australian Cathy Freeman wore a full body suit in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and won a gold medal in the
400-m race. Many swimmers in the 2008 Beijing Olympics wore (Speedo) body suits; it might have made a
difference in breaking many world records (Figure 6.31). Most elite swimmers (and cyclists) shave their body hair.
Such innovations can have the effect of slicing away milliseconds in a race, sometimes making the difference
between a gold and a silver medal. One consequence is that careful and precise guidelines must be continuously
developed to maintain the integrity of the sport.
FIGURE 6.31 Body suits, such as this LZR Racer Suit, have been credited with aiding in many world records after their release in 2008.
Smoother “skin” and more compression forces on a swimmer’s body provide at least less drag. (credit: NASA/Kathy Barnstorff)
Terminal Velocity
Some interesting situations connected to Newton’s second law occur when considering the effects of drag forces
upon a moving object. For instance, consider a skydiver falling through air under the influence of gravity. The two
forces acting on him are the force of gravity and the drag force (ignoring the small buoyant force). The downward
force of gravity remains constant regardless of the velocity at which the person is moving. However, as the person’s
velocity increases, the magnitude of the drag force increases until the magnitude of the drag force is equal to the
gravitational force, thus producing a net force of zero. A zero net force means that there is no acceleration, as shown
by Newton’s second law. At this point, the person’s velocity remains constant and we say that the person has
reached his terminal velocity Since is proportional to the speed squared, a heavier skydiver must go
faster for to equal his weight. Let’s see how this works out more quantitatively.
At the terminal velocity,
Thus,
286 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
Using the equation for drag force, we have
Solving for the velocity, we obtain
Assume the density of air is approximately A 75-kg skydiver descending head first has a cross-sectional area of
and a drag coefficient of approximately . We find that
This means a skydiver with a mass of 75 kg achieves a terminal velocity of about 350 km/h while traveling in a
headfirst position, minimizing the area and his drag. In a spread-eagle position, that terminal velocity may decrease
to about 200 km/h as the area increases. This terminal velocity becomes much smaller after the parachute opens.
EXAMPLE 6.17
Terminal Velocity of a Skydiver
Find the terminal velocity of an 85-kg skydiver falling in a spread-eagle position. Assume that in the spread-eagle
position, the diver has a cross-sectional area of .
Strategy
At terminal velocity, weight). Using the equation of drag force, we find
Thus, the drag force on the skydiver must equal the force of gravity (the person’s
Solution
The terminal velocity can be written as
Significance
This result is consistent with the value for velocity of mentioned earlier. The 75-kg skydiver going feet first had a terminal
He weighed less but had a smaller frontal area and so a smaller drag due to the air.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.10
Find the terminal velocity of a 50-kg skydiver falling in spread-eagle fashion.
The size of the object that is falling through air presents another interesting application of air drag. If you fall from a
5-m-high branch of a tree, you will likely get hurt—possibly fracturing a bone. However, a small squirrel does this all
the time, without getting hurt. You do not reach a terminal velocity in such a short distance, but the squirrel does.
The following interesting quote on animal size and terminal velocity is from a 1928 essay by a British biologist, J. B.
S. Haldane, titled “On Being the Right Size.
”
“To the mouse and any smaller animal, [gravity] presents practically no dangers. You can drop a mouse down a
thousand-yard mine shaft; and, on arriving at the bottom, it gets a slight shock and walks away, provided that the
ground is fairly soft. A rat is killed, a man is broken, and a horse splashes. For the resistance presented to movement
by the air is proportional to the surface of the moving object. Divide an animal’s length, breadth, and height each by
Access for free at openstax.org
6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 287
ten; its weight is reduced to a thousandth, but its surface only to a hundredth. So the resistance to falling in the case
of the small animal is relatively ten times greater than the driving force.
”
The above quadratic dependence of air drag upon velocity does not hold if the object is very small, is going very
slow, or is in a denser medium than air. Then we find that the drag force is proportional just to the velocity. This
relationship is given by Stokes’ law.
STOKES’ LAW
For a spherical object falling in a medium, the drag force is
6.6
where r is the radius of the object, is the viscosity of the fluid, and v is the object’s velocity.
Good examples of Stokes’ law are provided by microorganisms, pollen, and dust particles. Because each of these
objects is so small, we find that many of these objects travel unaided only at a constant (terminal) velocity. Terminal
velocities for bacteria (size about can be about To move at a greater speed, many bacteria swim using
flagella (organelles shaped like little tails) that are powered by little motors embedded in the cell.
Sediment in a lake can move at a greater terminal velocity (about bottom of the lake after being deposited on the surface.
so it can take days for it to reach the
If we compare animals living on land with those in water, you can see how drag has influenced evolution. Fish,
dolphins, and even massive whales are streamlined in shape to reduce drag forces. Birds are streamlined and
migratory species that fly large distances often have particular features such as long necks. Flocks of birds fly in the
shape of a spearhead as the flock forms a streamlined pattern (Figure 6.32). In humans, one important example of
streamlining is the shape of sperm, which need to be efficient in their use of energy.
FIGURE 6.32 Geese fly in a V formation during their long migratory travels. This shape reduces drag and energy consumption for individual
birds, and also allows them a better way to communicate. (credit: modification of work by “Julo”/Wikimedia Commons)
INTERACTIVE
In lecture demonstrations, we do measurements of the drag force (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21dragforce) on different
objects. The objects are placed in a uniform airstream created by a fan. Calculate the drag coefficient.
The Calculus of Velocity-Dependent Frictional Forces
When a body slides across a surface, the frictional force on it is approximately constant and given by
Unfortunately, the frictional force on a body moving through a liquid or a gas does not behave so simply. This drag
288 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
force is generally a complicated function of the body’s velocity. However, for a body moving in a straight line at
moderate speeds through a liquid such as water, the frictional force can often be approximated by
where bis a constant whose value depends on the dimensions and shape of the body and the properties of the
liquid, and v is the velocity of the body. Two situations for which the frictional force can be represented by this
equation are a motorboat moving through water and a small object falling slowly through a liquid.
Let’s consider the object falling through a liquid. The free-body diagram of this object with the positive direction
downward is shown in Figure 6.33. Newton’s second law in the vertical direction gives the differential equation
where we have written the acceleration as As v increases, the frictional force –b v increases until it matches
mg. At this point, there is no acceleration and the velocity remains constant at the terminal velocity From the
previous equation,
so
FIGURE 6.33 Free-body diagram of an object falling through a resistive medium.
We can find the object’s velocity by integrating the differential equation for v. First, we rearrange terms in this
equation to obtain
Assuming that integration of this equation yields
or
where are dummy variables of integration. With the limits given, we find
Since and we obtain
Access for free at openstax.org
6.4 • Drag Force and Terminal Speed 289
and
Notice that as ∞ which is the terminal velocity.
The position at any time may be found by integrating the equation for v. With
Assuming
which integrates to
EXAMPLE 6.18
Effect of the Resistive Force on a Motorboat
A motorboat is moving across a lake at a speed when its motor suddenly freezes up and stops. The boat then
slows down under the frictional force (a) What are the velocity and position of the boat as functions of
time? (b) If the boat slows down from 4.0 to 1.0 m/s in 10 s, how far does it travel before stopping?
Solution
a. With the motor stopped, the only horizontal force on the boat is so from Newton’s second law,
which we can write as
Integrating this equation between the time zero when the velocity is we have
and the time twhen the velocity is ,
Thus,
which, since we can write this as
Now from the definition of velocity,
so we have
With the initial position zero, we have
290 6 • Applications of Newton's Laws
and
As time increases, and the position of the boat approaches a limiting value
Although this tells us that the boat takes an infinite amount of time to reach after a reasonable time. For example, at we have
the boat effectively stops
whereas we also have
Therefore, the boat’s velocity and position have essentially reached their final values.
b. With and we have so
and
Now the boat’s limiting position is
Significance
In the both of the previous examples, we found “limiting” values. The terminal velocity is the same as the limiting
velocity, which is the velocity of the falling object after a (relatively) long time has passed. Similarly, the limiting
distance of the boat is the distance the boat will travel after a long amount of time has passed. Due to the properties
of exponential decay, the time involved to reach either of these values is actually not too long (certainly not an
infinite amount of time!) but they are quickly found by taking the limit to infinity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 6.11
Suppose the resistive force of the air on a skydiver can be approximated by 100-kg skydiver is 60 m/s, what is the value of b?
. If the terminal velocity of a
Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter Review
Key Terms
banked curve curve in a road that is sloping in a
manner that helps a vehicle negotiate the curve
centripetal force any net force causing uniform
circular motion
Coriolis force inertial force causing the apparent
deflection of moving objects when viewed in a
rotating frame of reference
drag force force that always opposes the motion of
an object in a fluid; unlike simple friction, the drag
force is proportional to some function of the velocity
of the object in that fluid
friction force that opposes relative motion or
attempts at motion between systems in contact
ideal banking sloping of a curve in a road, where the
angle of the slope allows the vehicle to negotiate
the curve at a certain speed without the aid of
Key Equations
Magnitude of static friction
Magnitude of kinetic friction
Centripetal force
Ideal angle of a banked curve
Drag force
Stokes’ law
Summary
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws
• Newton’s laws of motion can be applied in
numerous situations to solve motion problems.
• Some problems contain multiple force vectors
acting in different directions on an object. Be
sure to draw diagrams, resolve all force vectors
into horizontal and vertical components, and
draw a free-body diagram. Always analyze the
direction in which an object accelerates so that
you can determine whether or
• The normal force on an object is not always equal
in magnitude to the weight of the object. If an
object is accelerating vertically, the normal force
is less than or greater than the weight of the
object. Also, if the object is on an inclined plane,
the normal force is always less than the full
weight of the object.
• Some problems contain several physical
quantities, such as forces, acceleration, velocity,
or position. You can apply concepts from
6 • Chapter Review 291
friction between the tires and the road; the net
external force on the vehicle equals the horizontal
centripetal force in the absence of friction
inertial force force that has no physical origin
kinetic friction force that opposes the motion of two
systems that are in contact and moving relative to
each other
noninertial frame of reference accelerated frame of
reference
static friction force that opposes the motion of two
systems that are in contact and are not moving
relative to each other
terminal velocity constant velocity achieved by a
falling object, which occurs when the weight of the
object is balanced by the upward drag force
kinematics and dynamics to solve these
problems.
6.2 Friction
• Friction is a contact force that opposes the
motion or attempted motion between two
systems. Simple friction is proportional to the
normal force Nsupporting the two systems.
• The magnitude of static friction force between
two materials stationary relative to each other is
determined using the coefficient of static friction,
which depends on both materials.
• The kinetic friction force between two materials
moving relative to each other is determined using
the coefficient of kinetic friction, which also
depends on both materials and is always less
than the coefficient of static friction.
6.3 Centripetal Force
• Centripetal force is a “center-seeking” force
that always points toward the center of rotation.
It is perpendicular to linear velocity and has the
292 6 • Chapter Review
magnitude
• Rotating and accelerated frames of reference are
noninertial. Inertial forces, such as the Coriolis
force, are needed to explain motion in such
frames.
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
• Drag forces acting on an object moving in a fluid
Conceptual Questions
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws
1. To simulate the apparent weightlessness of
space orbit, astronauts are trained in the hold of
a cargo aircraft that is accelerating downward at
g. Why do they appear to be weightless, as
measured by standing on a bathroom scale, in
this accelerated frame of reference? Is there any
difference between their apparent
weightlessness in orbit and in the aircraft?
6.2 Friction
2. 3. 4. The glue on a piece of tape can exert forces. Can
these forces be a type of simple friction?
Explain, considering especially that tape can
stick to vertical walls and even to ceilings.
When you learn to drive, you discover that you
need to let up slightly on the brake pedal as you
come to a stop or the car will stop with a jerk.
Explain this in terms of the relationship between
static and kinetic friction.
When you push a piece of chalk across a
chalkboard, it sometimes screeches because it
rapidly alternates between slipping and sticking
to the board. Describe this process in more
detail, in particular, explaining how it is related
to the fact that kinetic friction is less than static
friction. (The same slip-grab process occurs
when tires screech on pavement.)
A physics major is cooking breakfast when she
notices that the frictional force between her
steel spatula and Teflon frying pan is only 0.200
N. Knowing the coefficient of kinetic friction
between the two materials, she quickly
calculates the normal force. What is it?
6.3 Centripetal Force
6. If you wish to reduce the stress (which is related
to centripetal force) on high-speed tires, would
you use large- or small-diameter tires? Explain.
5. Access for free at openstax.org
oppose the motion. For larger objects (such as a
baseball) moving at a velocity in air, the drag
force is determined using the drag coefficient
(typical values are given in Table 6.2), the area of
the object facing the fluid, and the fluid density.
• For small objects (such as a bacterium) moving in
a denser medium (such as water), the drag force
is given by Stokes’ law.
7. 8. 9. Define centripetal force. Can any type of force
(for example, tension, gravitational force,
friction, and so on) be a centripetal force? Can
any combination of forces be a centripetal force?
If centripetal force is directed toward the center,
why do you feel that you are ‘thrown’ away from
the center as a car goes around a curve? Explain.
Race car drivers routinely cut corners, as shown
below (Path 2). Explain how this allows the
curve to be taken at the greatest speed.
10. Many amusement parks have rides that make
vertical loops like the one shown below. For
safety, the cars are attached to the rails in such a
way that they cannot fall off. If the car goes over
the top at just the right speed, gravity alone will
supply the centripetal force. What other force
acts and what is its direction if:
(a) The car goes over the top at faster than this
speed?
(b) The car goes over the top at slower than this
11. 12. 13. 14. speed?
What causes water to be removed from clothes
in a spin-dryer?
As a skater forms a circle, what force is
responsible for making his turn? Use a free-body
diagram in your answer.
Suppose a child is riding on a merry-go-round at a
distance about halfway between its center and edge.
She has a lunch box resting on wax paper, so that
there is very little friction between it and the merry-
go-round. (a) Which path shown below, as viewed
from the ground, will the lunch box take when she
lets go? (b) The lunch box leaves a trail in the dust
on the merry-go-round. What is the shape of the
dust trail? Explain your answers.
Do you feel yourself thrown to either side when
you negotiate a curve that is ideally banked for
15. 16. 17. 18. 6 • Chapter Review 293
your car’s speed? What is the direction of the
force exerted on you by the car seat?
Suppose a mass is moving in a circular path on a
frictionless table as shown below. In Earth’s frame
of reference, there is no centrifugal force pulling the
mass away from the center of rotation, yet there is a
force stretching the string attaching the mass to the
nail. Using concepts related to centripetal force and
Newton’s third law, explain what force stretches the
string, identifying its physical origin.
When a toilet is flushed or a sink is drained, the
water (and other material) begins to rotate about
the drain on the way down. Assuming no initial
rotation and a flow initially directly straight
toward the drain, explain what causes the
rotation and which direction it has in the
Northern Hemisphere. (Note that this is a small
effect and in most toilets the rotation is caused
by directional water jets.) Would the direction of
rotation reverse if water were forced up the
drain?
A car rounds a curve and encounters a patch of
ice with a very low coefficient of kinetic fiction.
The car slides off the road. Describe the path of
the car as it leaves the road.
In one amusement park ride, riders enter a large
vertical barrel and stand against the wall on its
horizontal floor. The barrel is spun up and the
floor drops away. Riders feel as if they are
pinned to the wall by a force something like the
gravitational force. This is an inertial force
sensed and used by the riders to explain events
in the rotating frame of reference of the barrel.
Explain in an inertial frame of reference (Earth is
nearly one) what pins the riders to the wall, and
identify all forces acting on them.
294 6 • Chapter Review
19. 20. Two friends are having a conversation. Anna
says a satellite in orbit is in free fall because the
satellite keeps falling toward Earth. Tom says a
satellite in orbit is not in free fall because the
acceleration due to gravity is not . Who
do you agree with and why?
A nonrotating frame of reference placed at the
center of the Sun is very nearly an inertial one.
Why is it not exactly an inertial frame?
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
21. Athletes such as swimmers and bicyclists wear
body suits in competition. Formulate a list of
pros and cons of such suits.
Problems
6.1 Solving Problems with Newton’s Laws
25. A 30.0-kg girl in a swing is pushed to one side
and held at rest by a horizontal force so that
the swing ropes are with respect to the
vertical. (a) Calculate the tension in each of the
two ropes supporting the swing under these
conditions. (b) Calculate the magnitude of
Find the tension in each of the three cables
supporting the traffic light if it weighs 2.00 × 102
N.
26. 27. Three forces act on an object, considered to be a
particle, which moves with constant velocity
Access for free at openstax.org
22. 23. 24. 28. 29. Two expressions were used for the drag force
experienced by a moving object in a liquid. One
depended upon the speed, while the other was
proportional to the square of the speed. In
which types of motion would each of these
expressions be more applicable than the other
one?
As cars travel, oil and gasoline leaks onto the
road surface. If a light rain falls, what does this
do to the control of the car? Does a heavy rain
make any difference?
Why can a squirrel jump from a tree branch to
the ground and run away undamaged, while a
human could break a bone in such a fall?
Two of the forces are
and Find
the third force.
A flea jumps by exerting a force of
straight down on the ground. A
breeze blowing on the flea parallel to the ground
exerts a force of on the flea
while the flea is still in contact with the ground.
Find the direction and magnitude of the
acceleration of the flea if its mass is
. Do not neglect the
gravitational force.
Two muscles in the back of the leg pull upward on
the Achilles tendon, as shown below. (These
muscles are called the medial and lateral heads of
the gastrocnemius muscle.) Find the magnitude and
direction of the total force on the Achilles tendon.
What type of movement could be caused by this
force?
30. 31. 32. After a mishap, a 76.0-kg circus performer clings to
a trapeze, which is being pulled to the side by
another circus artist, as shown here. Calculate the
tension in the two ropes if the person is momentarily
motionless. Include a free-body diagram in your
solution.
A 35.0-kg dolphin accelerates opposite to the
motion from 12.0 to 7.50 m/s in 2.30 s to join
another dolphin in play. What average force was
exerted to slow the first dolphin if it was moving
horizontally? (The gravitational force is balanced
by the buoyant force of the water.)
When starting a foot race, a 70.0-kg sprinter
exerts an average force of 650 N backward on
the ground for 0.800 s. (a) What is their final
speed? (b) How far do they travel?
6 • Chapter Review 295
33. A large rocket has a mass of at
takeoff, and its engines produce a thrust of
(a) Find its initial acceleration if
it takes off vertically. (b) How long does it take to
reach a velocity of 120 km/h straight up,
assuming constant mass and thrust?
34. 35. 36. 37. A basketball player jumps straight up for a ball.
To do this, he lowers his body 0.300 m and then
accelerates through this distance by forcefully
straightening his legs. This player leaves the
floor with a vertical velocity sufficient to carry
him 0.900 m above the floor. (a) Calculate his
velocity when he leaves the floor. (b) Calculate
his acceleration while he is straightening his
legs. He goes from zero to the velocity found in
(a) in a distance of 0.300 m. (c) Calculate the
force he exerts on the floor to do this, given that
his mass is 110.0 kg.
A 2.50-kg fireworks shell is fired straight up from
a mortar and reaches a height of 110.0 m. (a)
Neglecting air resistance (a poor assumption,
but we will make it for this example), calculate
the shell’s velocity when it leaves the mortar. (b)
The mortar itself is a tube 0.450 m long.
Calculate the average acceleration of the shell in
the tube as it goes from zero to the velocity
found in (a). (c) What is the average force on the
shell in the mortar? Express your answer in
newtons and as a ratio to the weight of the shell.
A 0.500-kg potato is fired at an angle of
above the horizontal from a PVC pipe used as a
“potato gun” and reaches a height of 110.0 m.
(a) Neglecting air resistance, calculate the
potato’s velocity when it leaves the gun. (b) The
gun itself is a tube 0.450 m long. Calculate the
average acceleration of the potato in the tube as
it goes from zero to the velocity found in (a). (c)
What is the average force on the potato in the
gun? Express your answer in newtons and as a
ratio to the weight of the potato.
An elevator filled with passengers has a mass of
. (a) The elevator accelerates
upward from rest at a rate of for 1.50
s. Calculate the tension in the cable supporting
the elevator. (b) The elevator continues upward
at constant velocity for 8.50 s. What is the
tension in the cable during this time? (c) The
elevator accelerates opposite to the motion at a
rate of for 3.00 s. What is the tension
in the cable during acceleration opposite to the
motion? (d) How high has the elevator moved
296 6 • Chapter Review
38. 39. 40. 41. 42. above its original starting point, and what is its
final velocity?
A 20.0-g ball hangs from the roof of a freight car
by a string. When the freight car begins to move,
the string makes an angle of with the
vertical. (a) What is the acceleration of the
freight car? (b) What is the tension in the string?
A student’s backpack, full of textbooks, is hung
from a spring scale attached to the ceiling of an
elevator. When the elevator is accelerating
downward at , the scale reads 60 N. (a)
What is the mass of the backpack? (b) What
does the scale read if the elevator moves
upward while speeding up at a rate ? (c)
What does the scale read if the elevator moves
upward at constant velocity? (d) If the elevator
had no brakes and the cable supporting it were
to break loose so that the elevator could fall
freely, what would the spring scale read?
A service elevator takes a load of garbage, mass
10.0 kg, from a floor of a skyscraper under
construction, down to ground level, accelerating
downward at a rate of . Find the
magnitude of the force the garbage exerts on the
floor of the service elevator?
A roller coaster car starts from rest at the top of
a track 30.0 m long and inclined at to the
horizontal. Assume that friction can be ignored.
(a) What is the acceleration of the car? (b) How
much time elapses before it reaches the bottom
of the track?
The device shown below is the Atwood’s
machine considered in Example 6.5. Assuming
that the masses of the string and the frictionless
pulley are negligible, (a) find an equation for the
acceleration of the two blocks; (b) find an
equation for the tension in the string; and (c) find
both the acceleration and tension when block 1
has mass 2.00 kg and block 2 has mass 4.00 kg.
Access for free at openstax.org
43. 44. Two blocks are connected by a massless rope as
shown below. The mass of the block on the table is
4.0 kg and the hanging mass is 1.0 kg. The table
and the pulley are frictionless. (a) Find the
acceleration of the system. (b) Find the tension in
the rope. (c) Find the speed with which the hanging
mass hits the floor if it starts from rest and is
initially located 1.0 m from the floor.
Shown below are two carts connected by a cord
that passes over a small frictionless pulley. Each
cart rolls freely with negligible friction. Calculate
the acceleration of the carts and the tension in
the cord.
45. A 2.00 kg block (mass 1) and a 4.00 kg block
(mass 2) are connected by a light string as
shown; the inclination of the ramp is .
Friction is negligible. What is (a) the acceleration
of each block and (b) the tension in the string?
6.2 Friction
46. 47. 48. (a) When rebuilding an engine, a physics major
must exert N of force to insert a dry
steel piston into a steel cylinder. What is the
normal force between the piston and cylinder?
(b) What force would they have to exert if the
steel parts were oiled?
(a) What is the maximum frictional force in the
knee joint of a person who supports 66.0 kg of
her mass on that knee? (b) During strenuous
exercise, it is possible to exert forces to the
joints that are easily 10 times greater than the
weight being supported. What is the maximum
force of friction under such conditions? The
frictional forces in joints are relatively small in all
circumstances except when the joints
deteriorate, such as from injury or arthritis.
Increased frictional forces can cause further
damage and pain.
Suppose you have a 120-kg wooden crate
resting on a wood floor, with coefficient of static
friction 0.500 between these wood surfaces. (a)
What maximum force can you exert horizontally
49. 50. 51. 6 • Chapter Review 297
on the crate without moving it? (b) If you
continue to exert this force once the crate starts
to slip, what will its acceleration then be? The
coefficient of sliding friction is known to be
0.300 for this situation.
(a) If half of the weight of a small
utility truck is supported by its
two drive wheels, what is the maximum
acceleration it can achieve on dry concrete? (b)
Will a metal cabinet lying on the wooden bed of
the truck slip if it accelerates at this rate? (c)
Solve both problems assuming the truck has
four-wheel drive.
A team of eight dogs pulls a sled with waxed
wood runners on wet snow (mush!). The dogs
have average masses of 19.0 kg, and the loaded
sled with its rider has a mass of 210 kg. (a)
Calculate the acceleration of the dogs starting
from rest if each dog exerts an average force of
185 N backward on the snow. (b) Calculate the
force in the coupling between the dogs and the
sled.
Consider the 65.0-kg ice skater being pushed by
two others shown below. (a) Find the direction
and magnitude of the total force exerted on
her by the others, given that the magnitudes
and are 26.4 N and 18.6 N, respectively. (b)
What is her initial acceleration if she is initially
stationary and wearing steel-bladed skates that
point in the direction of (c) What is her
acceleration assuming she is already moving in
the direction of (Remember that friction
always acts in the direction opposite that of
motion or attempted motion between surfaces
in contact.)
298 6 • Chapter Review
52. Show that the acceleration of any object down a
frictionless incline that makes an angle with the
horizontal is . (Note that this acceleration
is independent of mass.)
53. Show that the acceleration of any object down
an incline where friction behaves simply (that is,
where is
Note that the acceleration is independent of
mass and reduces to the expression found in the
previous problem when friction becomes
negligibly small
Access for free at openstax.org
54. 55. 56. 57. Calculate the acceleration opposite to the
motion of a snow boarder going up a
slope, assuming the coefficient of friction for
waxed wood on wet snow. The result of the
preceding problem may be useful, but be careful
to consider the fact that the snow boarder is
going uphill.
A machine at a post office sends packages out a
chute and down a ramp to be loaded into
delivery vehicles. (a) Calculate the acceleration
of a box heading down a slope, assuming
the coefficient of friction for a parcel on waxed
wood is 0.100. (b) Find the angle of the slope
down which this box could move at a constant
velocity. You can neglect air resistance in both
parts.
If an object is to rest on an incline without
slipping, then friction must equal the component
of the weight of the object parallel to the incline.
This requires greater and greater friction for
steeper slopes. Show that the maximum angle of
an incline above the horizontal for which an
object will not slide down is You
may use the result of the previous problem.
Assume that and that static friction has
reached its maximum value.
Calculate the maximum acceleration of a car
that is heading down a slope (one that
makes an angle of with the horizontal)
under the following road conditions. You may
assume that the weight of the car is evenly
distributed on all four tires and that the
coefficient of static friction is involved—that is,
58. 59. 60. 61. the tires are not allowed to slip during the
acceleration opposite to the motion. (Ignore
rolling.) Calculate for a car: (a) On dry concrete.
(b) On wet concrete. (c) On ice, assuming that
, the same as for shoes on ice.
Calculate the maximum acceleration of a car
that is heading up a slope (one that makes
an angle of with the horizontal) under the
following road conditions. Assume that only half
the weight of the car is supported by the two
drive wheels and that the coefficient of static
friction is involved—that is, the tires are not
allowed to slip during the acceleration. (Ignore
rolling.) (a) On dry concrete. (b) On wet concrete.
(c) On ice, assuming that , the same
as for shoes on ice.
Repeat the preceding problem for a car with
four-wheel drive.
A freight train consists of two
engines and 45 cars with average masses of
(a) What force must each
engine exert backward on the track to accelerate
the train at a rate of if the
force of friction is , assuming the
engines exert identical forces? This is not a large
frictional force for such a massive system.
Rolling friction for trains is small, and
consequently, trains are very energy-efficient
transportation systems. (b) What is the force in
the coupling between the 37th and 38th cars
(this is the force each exerts on the other),
assuming all cars have the same mass and that
friction is evenly distributed among all of the
cars and engines?
Consider the 52.0-kg mountain climber shown
below. (a) Find the tension in the rope and the
force that the mountain climber must exert with
her feet on the vertical rock face to remain
stationary. Assume that the force is exerted
parallel to her legs. Also, assume negligible force
exerted by her arms. (b) What is the minimum
coefficient of friction between her shoes and the
cliff?
62. 63. 64. 6 • Chapter Review 299
A contestant in a winter sporting event pushes a
45.0-kg block of ice across a frozen lake as shown
below. The coefficient of friction of ice can be found
in Table 6.1. (a) Calculate the minimum force Fhe
must exert to get the block moving. (b) What is its
acceleration once it starts to move, if that force is
maintained?
The contestant now pulls the block of ice with a rope
over his shoulder at the same angle above the
horizontal as shown below. The coefficient of friction
of ice can be found in Table 6.1. Calculate the
minimum force Fhe must exert to get the block
moving. (b) What is its acceleration once it starts to
move, if that force is maintained?
At a post office, a parcel that is a 20.0-kg box
300 6 • Chapter Review
66. 67. slides down a ramp inclined at with the
horizontal. The coefficient of kinetic friction
between the box and plane is 0.0300. (a) Find
the acceleration of the box. (b) Find the velocity
of the box as it reaches the end of the plane, if
the length of the plane is 2 m and the box starts
at rest.
6.3 Centripetal Force
65. (a) A 22.0-kg child is riding a playground merry-
go-round that is rotating at 40.0 rev/min. What
centripetal force is exerted if he is 1.25 m from
its center? (b) What centripetal force is exerted if
the merry-go-round rotates at 3.00 rev/min and
he is 8.00 m from its center? (c) Compare each
force with his weight.
Calculate the centripetal force on the end of a
100-m (radius) wind turbine blade that is
rotating at 0.5 rev/s. Assume the mass is 4 kg.
What is the ideal banking angle for a gentle turn
of 1.20-km radius on a highway with a 105 km/h
speed limit (about 65 mi/h), assuming everyone
travels at the limit?
What is the ideal speed to take a 100.0-m-
radius curve banked at a angle?
(a) What is the radius of a bobsled turn banked
at and taken at 30.0 m/s, assuming it is
ideally banked? (b) Calculate the centripetal
acceleration. (c) Does this acceleration seem
large to you?
Part of riding a bicycle involves leaning at the
correct angle when making a turn, as seen below.
To be stable, the force exerted by the ground
must be on a line going through the center of
gravity. The force on the bicycle wheel can be
resolved into two perpendicular
components—friction parallel to the road (this
must supply the centripetal force) and the vertical
normal force (which must equal the system’s
weight). (a) Show that (as defined as shown) is
related to the speed v and radius of curvature r of
the turn in the same way as for an ideally banked
roadway—that is, (b) Calculate
for a 12.0-m/s turn of radius 30.0 m (as in a
race).
68. 69. 70. Access for free at openstax.org
71. 72. 73. If a car takes a banked curve at less than the
ideal speed, friction is needed to keep it from
sliding toward the inside of the curve (a problem
on icy mountain roads). (a) Calculate the ideal
speed to take a 100.0 m radius curve banked at
. (b) What is the minimum coefficient of
friction needed for a frightened driver to take the
same curve at 20.0 km/h?
Modern roller coasters have vertical loops like the
one shown here. The radius of curvature is smaller
at the top than on the sides so that the downward
centripetal acceleration at the top will be greater
than the acceleration due to gravity, keeping the
passengers pressed firmly into their seats. What is
the speed of the roller coaster at the top of the loop
if the radius of curvature there is 15.0 m and the
downward acceleration of the car is 1.50 g?
A child of mass 40.0 kg is in a roller coaster car that
travels in a loop of radius 7.00 m. At point A the
speed of the car is 10.0 m/s, and at point B, the
speed is 10.5 m/s. Assume the child is not holding
on and does not wear a seat belt. (a) What is the
force of the car seat on the child at point A? (b) What
is the force of the car seat on the child at point B? (c)
What minimum speed is required to keep the child in
his seat at point A?
80. 81. 82. 74. 75. 76. In the simple Bohr model of the ground state of
the hydrogen atom, the electron travels in a
circular orbit around a fixed proton. The radius of
the orbit is and the speed of
the electron is The mass of an
electron is . What is the force
on the electron?
Railroad tracks follow a circular curve of radius
500.0 m and are banked at an angle of . For
trains of what speed are these tracks designed?
The CERN particle accelerator is circular with a
circumference of 26.7 km. (a) What is the
acceleration of the protons
that move around the
accelerator at speed of light is is the force on the protons?
of the speed of light? (The
) (b) What
A car rounds an unbanked curve of radius 65 m.
If the coefficient of static friction between the
road and car is 0.70, what is the maximum
speed at which the car can traverse the curve
without slipping?
A banked highway is designed for traffic moving
at 90.0 km/h. The radius of the curve is 310 m.
What is the angle of banking of the highway?
6.4 Drag Force and Terminal Speed
79. The terminal velocity of a person falling in air
depends upon the weight and the area of the
person facing the fluid. Find the terminal velocity
(in meters per second and kilometers per hour)
of an 80.0-kg skydiver falling in a headfirst
83. 84. 77. 85. 86. 78. 87. 6 • Chapter Review 301
position with a surface area of .
A 60.0-kg and a 90.0-kg skydiver jump from an
airplane at an altitude of , both
falling in a headfirst position. Make some
assumption on their frontal areas and calculate
their terminal velocities. How long will it take for
each skydiver to reach the ground (assuming the
time to reach terminal velocity is small)?
Assume all values are accurate to three
significant digits.
A 560-g squirrel with a surface area of
falls from a 5.0-m tree to the ground. Estimate
its terminal velocity. (Use a drag coefficient for a
skydiver falling feet first.) What will be the
velocity of a 56-kg person hitting the ground,
assuming no drag contribution in such a short
distance?
To maintain a constant speed, the force provided
by a car’s engine must equal the drag force plus
the force of friction of the road (the rolling
resistance). (a) What are the drag forces at 70
km/h and 100 km/h for a Toyota Camry? (Drag
area is ) (b) What is the drag force at 70
km/h and 100 km/h for a Hummer H2? (Drag
area is Assume all values are accurate
to three significant digits.
By what factor does the drag force on a car
increase as it goes from 65 to 110 km/h?
Calculate the velocity a spherical rain drop
would achieve falling from 5.00 km (a) in the
absence of air drag (b) with air drag. Take the
size across of the drop to be 4 mm, the density
to be , and the surface area
to be .
Using Stokes’ law, verify that the units for
viscosity are kilograms per meter per second.
Find the terminal velocity of a spherical
bacterium (diameter ) falling in water.
You will first need to note that the drag force is
equal to the weight at terminal velocity. Take the
density of the bacterium to be
.
Stokes’ law describes sedimentation of particles
in liquids and can be used to measure viscosity.
Particles in liquids achieve terminal velocity
quickly. One can measure the time it takes for a
particle to fall a certain distance and then use
Stokes’ law to calculate the viscosity of the
liquid. Suppose a steel ball bearing (density
302 6 • Chapter Review
, diameter 3.0 mm) is dropped
in a container of motor oil. It takes 12 s to fall a
distance of 0.60 m. Calculate the viscosity of the
oil.
88. Suppose that the resistive force of the air on a
skydiver can be approximated by the terminal velocity of a 50.0-kg skydiver is
60.0 m/s, what is the value of b ?
If
Additional Problems
90. (a) What is the final velocity of a car originally
traveling at 50.0 km/h that accelerates opposite
to the motion at a rate of for 50.0 s?
Assume a coefficient of friction of 1.0. (b) What
is unreasonable about the result? (c) Which
premise is unreasonable, or which premises are
inconsistent?
91. A 75.0-kg woman stands on a bathroom scale in
an elevator that accelerates from rest to 30.0
m/s in 2.00 s. (a) Calculate the scale reading in
newtons and compare it with her weight. (The
scale exerts an upward force on her equal to its
reading.) (b) What is unreasonable about the
result? (c) Which premise is unreasonable, or
which premises are inconsistent?
92. (a) Calculate the minimum coefficient of friction
needed for a car to negotiate an unbanked 50.0
m radius curve at 30.0 m/s. (b) What is
unreasonable about the result? (c) Which
premises are unreasonable or inconsistent?
93. As shown below, if tension in string 1?
what is the
94. As shown below, if and
what is the magnitude of the acceleration of the
suspended object? All surfaces are frictionless.
Access for free at openstax.org
89. A small diamond of mass 10.0 g drops from a
swimmer’s earring and falls through the water,
reaching a terminal velocity of 2.0 m/s. (a)
Assuming the frictional force on the diamond
obeys what is b ? (b) How far does the
diamond fall before it reaches 90 percent of its
terminal speed?
95. As shown below, if what is the
tension in the connecting string? The pulley and
all surfaces are frictionless.
96. A small space probe is released from a
spaceship. The space probe has mass 20.0 kg
and contains 90.0 kg of fuel. It starts from rest in
deep space, from the origin of a coordinate
system based on the spaceship, and burns fuel
at the rate of 3.00 kg/s. The engine provides a
constant thrust of 120.0 N. (a) Write an
expression for the mass of the space probe as a
function of time, between 0 and 30 seconds,
assuming that the engine ignites fuel beginning
at (b) What is the velocity after 15.0 s? (c)
97. 98. 99. What is the position of the space probe after
15.0 s, with initial position at the origin? (d)
Write an expression for the position as a function
of time, for
A half-full recycling bin has mass 3.0 kg and is
pushed up a incline with constant speed
under the action of a 26-N force acting up and
parallel to the incline. The incline has friction.
What magnitude force must act up and parallel
to the incline for the bin to move down the
incline at constant velocity?
A child has mass 6.0 kg and slides down a
incline with constant speed under the action of a
13.4-N force acting up and parallel to the
incline. What is the coefficient of kinetic friction
between the child and the surface of the incline?
The two barges shown here are coupled by a cable
of negligible mass. The mass of the front barge is
and the mass of the rear barge is
A tugboat pulls the front barge with
a horizontal force of magnitude and
the frictional forces of the water on the front and
rear barges are and
respectively. Find the horizontal acceleration of the
barges and the tension in the connecting cable.
100. If the order of the barges of the preceding
exercise is reversed so that the tugboat pulls the
barge with a force of
what are the acceleration of the
barges and the tension in the coupling cable?
101. An object with mass m moves along the x-axis.
Its position at any time is given by
where p and q are constants.
Find the net force on this object for any time t .
102. A helicopter with mass position given by
has a
Find
the net force on the helicopter at
103. Located at the origin, an electric car of mass m is
6 • Chapter Review 303
at rest and in equilibrium. A time dependent
force of is applied at time , and its
components are and
where p, q, and n are constants. Find the
position and velocity as functions of
time t .
104. A particle of mass m is located at the origin. It is
at rest and in equilibrium. A time-dependent
force of is applied at time , and its
components are and
where p, q, and n are constants. Find the
position and velocity as functions of
time t .
105. A 2.0-kg object has a velocity of at
A constant resultant force of
then acts on the object for 3.0 s.
What is the magnitude of the object’s velocity at
the end of the 3.0-s interval?
106. A 1.5-kg mass has an acceleration of
Only two forces act on the
mass. If one of the forces is
what is the magnitude of the other force?
107. A box is dropped onto a conveyor belt moving at
3.4 m/s. If the coefficient of friction between the
box and the belt is 0.27, how long will it take
before the box moves without slipping?
108. Shown below is a 10.0-kg block being pushed by
a horizontal force of magnitude 200.0 N. The
coefficient of kinetic friction between the two
surfaces is 0.50. Find the acceleration of the
block.
109. As shown below, the mass of block 1 is
while the mass of block 2 is
The coefficient of friction between
and the inclined surface is What
is the acceleration of the system?
304 6 • Chapter Review
110. 111. 112. 113. A student is attempting to move a 30-kg mini-
fridge into her dorm room. During a moment of
inattention, the mini-fridge slides down a 35
degree incline at constant speed when she
applies a force of 25 N acting up and parallel to
the incline. What is the coefficient of kinetic
friction between the fridge and the surface of the
incline?
A crate of mass 100.0 kg rests on a rough
surface inclined at an angle of with the
horizontal. A massless rope to which a force can
be applied parallel to the surface is attached to
the crate and leads to the top of the incline. In
its present state, the crate is just ready to slip
and start to move down the plane. The
coefficient of friction is of that for the static
case. (a) What is the coefficient of static friction?
(b) What is the maximum force that can be
applied upward along the plane on the rope and
not move the block? (c) With a slightly greater
applied force, the block will slide up the plane.
Once it begins to move, what is its acceleration
and what reduced force is necessary to keep it
moving upward at constant speed? (d) If the
block is given a slight nudge to get it started
down the plane, what will be its acceleration in
that direction? (e) Once the block begins to slide
downward, what upward force on the rope is
required to keep the block from accelerating
downward?
A car is moving at high speed along a highway
when the driver makes an emergency braking.
The wheels become locked (stop rolling), and
the resulting skid marks are 32.0 meters long. If
the coefficient of kinetic friction between tires
and road is 0.550, and the acceleration was
constant during braking, how fast was the car
going when the wheels became locked?
A crate having mass 50.0 kg falls horizontally off the
114. 115. 116. 117. 118. Access for free at openstax.org
back of the flatbed truck, which is traveling at 100
km/h. Find the value of the coefficient of kinetic
friction between the road and crate if the crate
slides 50 m on the road in coming to rest. The initial
speed of the crate is the same as the truck, 100 km/
h.
A 15-kg sled is pulled across a horizontal, snow-
covered surface by a force applied to a rope at
30 degrees with the horizontal. The coefficient
of kinetic friction between the sled and the snow
is 0.20. (a) If the force is 33 N, what is the
horizontal acceleration of the sled? (b) What
must the force be in order to pull the sled at
constant velocity?
A 30.0-g ball at the end of a string is swung in a
vertical circle with a radius of 25.0 cm. The
tangential velocity is 200.0 cm/s. Find the
tension in the string: (a) at the top of the circle,
(b) at the bottom of the circle, and (c) at a
distance of 12.5 cm from the center of the circle
A particle of mass 0.50 kg starts moves through
a circular path in the xy-plane with a position
given by
where r is in meters and tis in seconds. (a) Find
the velocity and acceleration vectors as
functions of time. (b) Show that the acceleration
vector always points toward the center of the
circle (and thus represents centripetal
acceleration). (c) Find the centripetal force
vector as a function of time.
A stunt cyclist rides on the interior of a cylinder
12 m in radius. The coefficient of static friction
between the tires and the wall is 0.68. Find the
value of the minimum speed for the cyclist to
perform the stunt.
When a body of mass 0.25 kg is attached to a
vertical massless spring, it is extended 5.0 cm
from its unstretched length of 4.0 cm. The body
and spring are placed on a horizontal frictionless
surface and rotated about the held end of the
spring at 2.0 rev/s. How far is the spring
stretched?
119. 120. 121. 122. 123. 124. A piece of bacon starts to slide down the pan
when one side of a pan is raised up 5.0 cm. If
the length of the pan from pivot to the raising
point is 23.5 cm, what is the coefficient of static
friction between the pan and the bacon?
A plumb bob hangs from the roof of a railroad
car. The car rounds a circular track of radius
300.0 m at a speed of 90.0 km/h. At what angle
relative to the vertical does the plumb bob hang?
An airplane flies at 120.0 m/s and banks at a
angle. If its mass is (a) what is
the magnitude of the lift force? (b) what is the
radius of the turn?
The position of a particle is given by
where is a
constant. (a) Show that the particle moves in a
circle of radius A . (b) Calculate and then
show that the speed of the particle is a constant
(c) Determine and show that a is
given by (d) Calculate the centripetal
force on the particle. [Hint : For (b) and (c), you
will need to use and
Two blocks connected by a string are pulled across a
horizontal surface by a force applied to one of the
blocks, as shown below. The coefficient of kinetic
friction between the blocks and the surface is 0.25.
If each block has an acceleration of to the
right, what is the magnitude Fof the applied force?
As shown below, the coefficient of kinetic friction
between the surface and the larger block is 0.20,
and the coefficient of kinetic friction between the
surface and the smaller block is 0.30. If
and , what is the tension in the
connecting string?
125. 126. 127. 128. 6 • Chapter Review 305
In the figure, the coefficient of kinetic friction
between the surface and the blocks is If
find an expression for the magnitude of
the acceleration of either block (in terms of F ,
and g).
Two blocks are stacked as shown below, and rest on
a frictionless surface. There is friction between the
two blocks (coefficient of friction ). An external
force is applied to the top block at an angle with
the horizontal. What is the maximum force Fthat
can be applied for the two blocks to move together?
A box rests on the (horizontal) back of a truck.
The coefficient of static friction between the box
and the surface on which it rests is 0.24. What
maximum distance can the truck travel (starting
from rest and moving horizontally with constant
acceleration) in 3.0 s without having the box
slide?
A double-incline plane is shown below. The
coefficient of friction on the left surface is 0.30,
and on the right surface 0.16. Calculate the
acceleration of the system.
306 6 • Chapter Review
Challenge Problems
129. In a later chapter, you will find that the weight of
a particle varies with altitude such that
where is the radius of Earth and r
is the distance from Earth’s center. If the particle
is fired vertically with velocity from Earth’s
surface, determine its velocity as a function of
position r. (Hint: use the
rearrangement mentioned in the text.)
130. A large centrifuge, like the one shown below, is used
to expose aspiring astronauts to accelerations
similar to those experienced in rocket launches and
atmospheric reentries. (a) At what angular velocity is
the centripetal acceleration 10g if the rider is 15.0 m
from the center of rotation? (b) The rider’s cage
hangs on a pivot at the end of the arm, allowing it to
swing outward during rotation as shown in the
bottom accompanying figure. At what angle below
the horizontal will the cage hang when the
centripetal acceleration is 10g? (Hint: The arm
supplies centripetal force and supports the weight
of the cage. Draw a free-body diagram of the forces
to see what the angle should be.)
131. A car of mass 1000.0 kg is traveling along a level
road at 100.0 km/h when its brakes are applied.
Calculate the stopping distance if the coefficient
of kinetic friction of the tires is 0.500. Neglect air
resistance. (Hint: since the distance traveled is
of interest rather than the time, x is the desired
independent variable and not t . Use the Chain
Rule to change the variable:
132. An airplane flying at 200.0 m/s makes a turn
that takes 4.0 min. What bank angle is required?
What is the percentage increase in the perceived
Access for free at openstax.org
133. 134. weight of the passengers?
A skydiver is at an altitude of 1520 m. After 10.0
seconds of free fall, he opens his parachute and
finds that the air resistance, , is given by the
formula where bis a constant and v
is the velocity. If and the mass of the
skydiver is 82.0 kg, first set up differential
equations for the velocity and the position, and
then find: (a) the speed of the skydiver when the
parachute opens, (b) the distance fallen before
the parachute opens, (c) the terminal velocity
after the parachute opens (find the limiting
velocity), and (d) the time the skydiver is in the
air after the parachute opens.
In a television commercial, a small, spherical
bead of mass 4.00 g is released from rest at
135. 6 • Chapter Review 307
in a bottle of liquid shampoo. The terminal
speed is observed to be 2.00 cm/s. Find (a) the
value of the constant bin the equation
and (b) the value of the
resistive force when the bead reaches terminal
speed.
A boater and motor boat are at rest on a lake.
Together, they have mass 200.0 kg. If the thrust
of the motor is a constant force of 40.0 N in the
direction of motion, and if the resistive force of
the water is numerically equivalent to 2 times
the speed v of the boat, set up and solve the
differential equation to find: (a) the velocity of
the boat at time t ; (b) the limiting velocity (the
velocity after a long time has passed).
308 6 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 7
Work and Kinetic Energy
FIGURE 7.1 A sprinter exerts her maximum power with the greatest force in the short time her foot is in contact with the ground. This
adds to her kinetic energy, preventing her from slowing down during the race. Pushing back hard on the track generates a reaction force
that propels the sprinter forward to win at the finish. (credit: modification of work by Marie-Lan Nguyen)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
7.1 Work
7.2 Kinetic Energy
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
7.4 Power
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we discuss some basic physical concepts involved in every physical motion in the
universe, going beyond the concepts of force and change in motion, which we discussed in Motion in Two and Three
Dimensions and Newton’s Laws of Motion. These concepts are work, kinetic energy, and power. We explain how
these quantities are related to one another, which will lead us to a fundamental relationship called the work-energy
theorem. In the next chapter, we generalize this idea to the broader principle of conservation of energy.
The application of Newton’s laws usually requires solving differential equations that relate the forces acting on an
object to the accelerations they produce. Often, an analytic solution is intractable or impossible, requiring lengthy
numerical solutions or simulations to get approximate results. In such situations, more general relations, like the
work-energy theorem (or the conservation of energy), can still provide useful answers to many questions and
require a more modest amount of mathematical calculation. In particular, you will see how the work-energy
theorem is useful in relating the speeds of a particle, at different points along its trajectory, to the forces acting on it,
even when the trajectory is otherwise too complicated to deal with. Thus, some aspects of motion can be addressed
with fewer equations and without vector decompositions.
310 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
7.1 Work
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Represent the work done by any force
• Evaluate the work done for various forces
In physics, work is done on an object when energy is transferred to the object. In other words, work is done when a
force acts on something that undergoes a displacement from one position to another. Forces can vary as a function
of position, and displacements can be along various paths between two points. We first define the increment of
work dWdone by a force acting through an infinitesimal displacement as the dot product of these two vectors:
7.1
Then, we can add up the contributions for infinitesimal displacements, along a path between two positions, to get
the total work.
WORK DONE BY A FORCE
The work done by a force is the integral of the force with respect to displacement along the path of the
displacement:
7.2
The vectors involved in the definition of the work done by a force acting on a particle are illustrated in Figure 7.2.
While in general, Equation 7.2 requires mathematics beyond the scope of this text, in many simple situations this
integral becomes a familiar integral in one variable. We will examine several such examples and restrict our
discussion to these cases.
FIGURE 7.2 Vectors used to define work. The force acting on a particle and its infinitesimal displacement are shown at one point along the
path between Aand B . The infinitesimal work is the dot product of these two vectors; the total work is the integral of the dot product along
the path.
We choose to express the dot product in terms of the magnitudes of the vectors and the cosine of the angle between
them, because the meaning of the dot product for work can be put into words more directly in terms of magnitudes
and angles. We could equally well have expressed the dot product in terms of the various components introduced in
Vectors. In two dimensions, these were the x- and y-components in Cartesian coordinates, or the r- and
-components in polar coordinates; in three dimensions, it was just x-, y-, and z-components. Which choice is more
convenient depends on the situation. In words, you can express Equation 7.1 for the work done by a force acting
over a displacement as a product of one component acting parallel to the other component. From the properties of
vectors, it doesn’t matter if you take the component of the force parallel to the displacement or the component of
the displacement parallel to the force—you get the same result either way.
Recall that the magnitude of a force times the cosine of the angle the force makes with a given direction is the
component of the force in the given direction. The components of a vector can be positive, negative, or zero,
depending on whether the angle between the vector and the component-direction is between and or , or is equal to . As a result, the work done by a force can be positive, negative, or zero, depending on
whether the force is generally in the direction of the displacement, generally opposite to the displacement, or
and
Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 • Work 311
perpendicular to the displacement. The maximum work is done by a given force when it is along the direction of the
displacement ( ), and zero work is done when the force is perpendicular to the displacement ( ).
The units of work are units of force multiplied by units of length, which in the SI system is newtons times meters,
This combination is called a joule, for historical reasons that we will mention later, and is abbreviated as J. In
the English system, still used in the United States, the unit of force is the pound (lb) and the unit of distance is the
foot (ft), so the unit of work is the foot-pound
Work Done by Constant Forces and Contact Forces
The simplest work to evaluate is that done by a force that is constant in magnitude and direction. In this case, we
can factor out the force; the remaining integral is just the total displacement, which only depends on the end points
Aand B , but not on the path between them:
Figure 7.3(a) shows a person exerting a constant force along the handle of a lawn mower, which makes an angle
with the horizontal. The horizontal displacement of the lawn mower, over which the force acts, is The work done
on the lawn mower is , which the figure also illustrates as the horizontal component of the
force times the magnitude of the displacement.
FIGURE 7.3 Work done by a constant force. (a) A person pushes a lawn mower with a constant force. The component of the force parallel to
the displacement is the work done, as shown in the equation in the figure. (b) A person holds a briefcase. No work is done because the
displacement is zero. (c) The person in (b) walks horizontally while holding the briefcase. No work is done because is zero.
312 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
Figure 7.3(b) shows a person holding a briefcase. The person must exert an upward force, equal in magnitude to the
weight of the briefcase, but this force does no work, because the displacement over which it acts is zero.
In Figure 7.3(c), where the person in (b) is walking horizontally with constant speed, the work done by the person on
the briefcase is still zero, but now because the angle between the force exerted and the displacement is (
perpendicular to ) and .
EXAMPLE 7.1
Calculating the Work You Do to Push a Lawn Mower
How much work is done on the lawn mower by the person in Figure 7.3(a) if he exerts a constant force of 75.0 N at
an angle below the horizontal and pushes the mower 25.0 m on level ground?
Strategy
We can solve this problem by substituting the given values into the definition of work done on an object by a
constant force, stated in the equation . The force, angle, and displacement are given, so that only the
work Wis unknown.
Solution
The equation for the work is
Substituting the known values gives
Significance
Even though one and a half kilojoules may seem like a lot of work, we will see in Potential Energy and Conservation
of Energy that it’s only about as much work as you could do by burning one sixth of a gram of fat.
When you mow the grass, other forces act on the lawn mower besides the force you exert—namely, the contact force
of the ground and the gravitational force of Earth. Let’s consider the work done by these forces in general. For an
object moving on a surface, the displacement is tangent to the surface. The part of the contact force on the
object that is perpendicular to the surface is the normal force Since the cosine of the angle between the normal
and the tangent to a surface is zero, we have
The normal force never does work under these circumstances. (Note that if the displacement did have a relative
component perpendicular to the surface, the object would either leave the surface or break through it, and there
would no longer be any normal contact force. However, if the object is more than a particle, and has an internal
structure, the normal contact force can do work on it, for example, by displacing it or deforming its shape. This will
be mentioned in the next chapter.)
The part of the contact force on the object that is parallel to the surface is friction, For this object sliding along the
surface, kinetic friction is opposite to relative to the surface, so the work done by kinetic friction is negative. If
the magnitude of is constant (as it would be if all the other forces on the object were constant), then the work
done by friction is
7.3
where is the path length on the surface. The force of static friction does no work in the reference frame
between two surfaces because there is never displacement between the surfaces. As an external force, static
Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 • Work 313
friction can do work. Static friction can keep someone from sliding off a sled when the sled is moving and perform
positive work on the person. If you’re driving your car at the speed limit on a straight, level stretch of highway, the
negative work done by air resistance is balanced by the positive work done by the static friction of the road on the
drive wheels. You can pull the rug out from under an object in such a way that it slides backward relative to the rug,
but forward relative to the floor. In this case, kinetic friction exerted by the rug on the object could be in the same
direction as the displacement of the object, relative to the floor, and do positive work. The bottom line is that you
need to analyze each particular case to determine the work done by the forces, whether positive, negative or zero.
EXAMPLE 7.2
Moving a Couch
You decide to move your couch to a new position on your horizontal living room floor. The normal force on the couch
is 1 kN and the coefficient of friction is 0.6. (a) You first push the couch 3 m parallel to a wall and then 1 m
perpendicular to the wall (Ato Bin Figure 7.4). How much work is done by the frictional force? (b) You don’t like the
new position, so you move the couch straight back to its original position (Bto Ain Figure 7.4). What was the total
work done against friction moving the couch away from its original position and back again?
FIGURE 7.4 Top view of paths for moving a couch.
Strategy
The magnitude of the force of kinetic friction on the couch is constant, equal to the coefficient of friction times the
normal force, . Therefore, the work done by it is , where dis the path length traversed. The
segments of the paths are the sides of a right triangle, so the path lengths are easily calculated. In part (b), you can
use the fact that the work done against a force is the negative of the work done by the force.
Solution
a. The work done by friction i
b. The length of the path along the hypotenuse is , so the total work done against friction is
Significance
The total path over which the work of friction was evaluated began and ended at the same point (it was a closed
path), so that the total displacement of the couch was zero. However, the total work was not zero. The reason is that
forces like friction are classified as nonconservative forces, or dissipative forces, as we discuss in the next chapter.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.1
Can kinetic friction ever be a constant force for all paths?
The other force on the lawn mower mentioned above was Earth’s gravitational force, or the weight of the mower.
Near the surface of Earth, the gravitational force on an object of mass m has a constant magnitude, mg, and
constant direction, vertically down. Therefore, the work done by gravity on an object is the dot product of its weight
and its displacement. In many cases, it is convenient to express the dot product for gravitational work in terms of
the x-, y-, and z-components of the vectors. A typical coordinate system has the x-axis horizontal and the y-axis
vertically up. Then the gravitational force is so the work done by gravity, over any path from Ato B , is
314 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
7.4
The work done by a constant force of gravity on an object depends only on the object’s weight and the difference in
height through which the object is displaced. Gravity does negative work on an object that moves upward
( ), or, in other words, you must do positive work against gravity to lift an object upward. Alternately, gravity
does positive work on an object that moves downward ( ), or you do negative work against gravity to “lift”
an object downward, controlling its descent so it doesn’t drop to the ground. (“Lift” is used as opposed to “drop”.)
EXAMPLE 7.3
Shelving a Book
You lift an oversized library book, weighing 20 N, 1 m vertically down from a shelf, and carry it 3 m horizontally to a
table (Figure 7.5). (a) How much work does gravity do on the book? (b) When you’re finished, you move the book in a
straight line back to its original place on the shelf. What was the total work done against gravity, moving the book
away from its original position on the shelf and back again?
FIGURE 7.5 Side view of the paths for moving a book to and from a shelf.
Strategy
We have just seen that the work done by a constant force of gravity depends only on the weight of the object moved
and the difference in height for the path taken, . We can evaluate the difference in height to
answer (a) and (b).
Solution
a. Since the book starts on the shelf and is lifted down , we have
There is zero difference in height for any path that begins and ends at the same place on the shelf, so
b. Significance
Gravity does positive work (20 J) when the book moves down from the shelf. The gravitational force between two
objects is an attractive force, which does positive work when the objects get closer together. Gravity does zero work
(0 J) when the book moves horizontally from the shelf to the table and negative work (−20 J) when the book moves
from the table back to the shelf. The total work done by gravity is zero Unlike friction or
other dissipative forces, described in Example 7.2, the total work done against gravity, over any closed path, is zero.
Positive work is done against gravity on the upward parts of a closed path, but an equal amount of negative work is
done against gravity on the downward parts. In other words, work done ag ainstgravity, lifting an object up, is “given
back” when the object comes back down. Forces like gravity (those that do zero work over any closed path) are
classified as conservative forces and play an important role in physics.
Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 • Work 315
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.2
Can Earth’s gravity ever be a constant force for all paths?
Work Done by Forces that Vary
In general, forces may vary in magnitude and direction at points in space, and paths between two points may be
curved. The infinitesimal work done by a variable force can be expressed in terms of the components of the force
and the displacement along the path,
Here, the components of the force are functions of position along the path, and the displacements depend on the
equations of the path. (Although we chose to illustrate dWin Cartesian coordinates, other coordinates are better
suited to some situations.) Equation 7.2 defines the total work as a line integral, or the limit of a sum of infinitesimal
amounts of work. The physical concept of work is straightforward: you calculate the work for tiny displacements and
add them up. Sometimes the mathematics can seem complicated, but the following example demonstrates how
cleanly they can operate.
EXAMPLE 7.4
Work Done by a Variable Force over a Curved Path
An object moves along a parabolic path under the action of a force from the origin to the point
(Figure 7.6). Calculate the work done.
FIGURE 7.6 The parabolic path of a particle acted on by a given force.
Strategy
The components of the force are given functions of x and y. We can use the equation of the path to express y and dy
in terms of x and dx; namely,
Then, the integral for the work is just a definite integral of a function of x.
Solution
The infinitesimal element of work is
The integral of is so
Significance
This integral was not hard to do. You can follow the same steps, as in this example, to calculate line integrals
316 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
representing work for more complicated forces and paths. In this example, everything was given in terms of x- and
y-components, which are easiest to use in evaluating the work in this case. In other situations, magnitudes and
angles might be easier.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.3
Find the work done by the same force in Example 7.4 over a cubic path, points and
, between the same
One very important and widely applicable variable force is the force exerted by a perfectly elastic spring, which
satisfies Hooke’s law where kis the spring constant, and is the displacement from the
spring’s unstretched (equilibrium) position (Newton’s Laws of Motion). Note that the unstretched position is only the
same as the equilibrium position if no other forces are acting (or, if they are, they cancel one another). Forces
between molecules, or in any system undergoing small displacements from a stable equilibrium, behave
approximately like a spring force.
To calculate the work done by a spring force, we can choose the x-axis along the length of the spring, in the direction
of increasing length, as in Figure 7.7, with the origin at the equilibrium position (Then positive x
corresponds to a stretch and negative x to a compression.) With this choice of coordinates, the spring force has only
an x-component, , and the work done when x changes from to is
7.5
FIGURE 7.7 (a) The spring exerts no force at its equilibrium position. The spring exerts a force in the opposite direction to (b) an extension
or stretch, and (c) a compression.
Notice that before ending.
depends only on the starting and ending points, Aand B , and is independent of the actual path
between them, as long as it starts at Aand ends at B . That is, the actual path could involve going back and forth
Another interesting thing to notice about Equation 7.5 is that, for this one-dimensional case, you can readily see the
correspondence between the work done by a force and the area under the curve of the force versus its
displacement. Recall that, in general, a one-dimensional integral is the limit of the sum of infinitesimals, ,
representing the area of strips, as shown in Figure 7.8. In Equation 7.5, since is a straight line with slope
Access for free at openstax.org
7.1 • Work 317
, when plotted versus x, the “area” under the line is just an algebraic combination of triangular “areas,” where
“areas” above the x-axis are positive and those below are negative, as shown in Figure 7.9. The magnitude of one of
these “areas” is just one-half the triangle’s base, along the x-axis, times the triangle’s height, along the force axis.
(There are quotation marks around “area” because this base-height product has the units of work, rather than
square meters.)
FIGURE 7.8 A curve of f(x)versus x showing the area of an infinitesimal strip, f(x)dx, and the sum of such areas, which is the integral of f(x)
from to .
FIGURE 7.9 Curve of the spring force negative values of . When negative triangular areas. When versus x, showing areas under the line, between and , for both positive and
is negative, the total area under the curve for the integral in Equation 7.5 is the sum of positive and
is positive, the total area under the curve is the difference between two negative triangles.
EXAMPLE 7.5
Work Done by a Spring Force
A perfectly elastic spring requires 0.54 J of work to stretch 6 cm from its equilibrium position, as in Figure 7.7(b). (a)
What is its spring constant k ? (b) How much work is required to stretch it an additional 6 cm?
Strategy
Work “required” means work done against the spring force, which is the negative of the work in Equation 7.5, that is
For part (a), and ; for part (b), and . In part (a), the work is given and you
can solve for the spring constant; in part (b), you can use the value of k , from part (a), to solve for the work.
Solution
a. , so
b.
Significance
quantity Since the work done by a spring force is independent of the path, you only needed to calculate the difference in the
at the end points. Notice that the work required to stretch the spring from 0 to 12 cm is four times
that required to stretch it from 0 to 6 cm, because that work depends on the square of the amount of stretch from
318 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
equilibrium, . In this circumstance, the work to stretch the spring from 0 to 12 cm is also equal to the work for
a composite path from 0 to 6 cm followed by an additional stretch from 6 cm to 12 cm. Therefore,
, or , as we
found above.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.4
The spring in Example 7.5 is compressed 6 cm from its equilibrium length. (a) Does the spring force do positive or
negative work and (b) what is the magnitude?
7.2 Kinetic Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the kinetic energy of a particle given its mass and its velocity or momentum
• Evaluate the kinetic energy of a body, relative to different frames of reference
It’s plausible to suppose that the greater the velocity of a body, the greater effect it could have on other bodies. This
does not depend on the direction of the velocity, only its magnitude. At the end of the seventeenth century, a
quantity was introduced into mechanics to explain collisions between two perfectly elastic bodies, in which one
body makes a head-on collision with an identical body at rest. The first body stops, and the second body moves off
with the initial velocity of the first body. (If you have ever played billiards or croquet, or seen a model of Newton’s
Cradle, you have observed this type of collision.) The idea behind this quantity was related to the forces acting on a
body and was referred to as “the energy of motion.” Later on, during the eighteenth century, the name kinetic
energy was given to energy of motion.
With this history in mind, we can now state the classical definition of kinetic energy. Note that when we say
“classical,” we mean non-relativistic, that is, at speeds much less that the speed of light. At speeds comparable to
the speed of light, the special theory of relativity requires a different expression for the kinetic energy of a particle,
as discussed in Relativity (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction).
Since objects (or systems) of interest vary in complexity, we first define the kinetic energy of a particle with mass m.
KINETIC ENERGY
The kinetic energy of a particle is one-half the product of the particle’s mass m and the square of its speed v:
7.6
We then extend this definition to any system of particles by adding up the kinetic energies of all the constituent
particles:
7.7
Note that just as we can express Newton’s second law in terms of either the rate of change of momentum or mass
times the rate of change of velocity, so the kinetic energy of a particle can be expressed in terms of its mass and
momentum instead of its mass and velocity. Since , we see that
also expresses the kinetic energy of a single particle. Sometimes, this expression is more convenient to use than
Equation 7.6.
The units of kinetic energy are mass times the square of speed, or . But the units of force are mass times
Access for free at openstax.org
7.2 • Kinetic Energy 319
acceleration, , so the units of kinetic energy are also the units of force times distance, which are the units
of work, or joules. You will see in the next section that work and kinetic energy have the same units, because they
are different forms of the same, more general, physical property.
EXAMPLE 7.6
Kinetic Energy of an Object
(a) What is the kinetic energy of an 80-kg athlete, running at 10 m/s? (b) The Chicxulub crater in Yucatan, one of the
largest existing impact craters on Earth, is thought to have been created by an asteroid, traveling at
22 km/s and releasing of kinetic energy upon impact. What was its mass? (c) In nuclear reactors,
thermal neutrons, traveling at about 2.2 km/s, play an important role. What is the kinetic energy of such a particle?
Strategy
To answer these questions, you can use the definition of kinetic energy in Equation 7.6. You also have to look up the
mass of a neutron.
Solution
Don’t forget to convert km into m to do these calculations, although, to save space, we omitted showing these
conversions.
a.
b.
c.
Significance
In this example, we used the way mass and speed are related to kinetic energy, and we encountered a very wide
range of values for the kinetic energies. Different units are commonly used for such very large and very small values.
The energy of the impactor in part (b) can be compared to the explosive yield of TNT and nuclear explosions,
The Chicxulub asteroid’s kinetic energy was about a hundred million megatons. At the
other extreme, the energy of subatomic particle is expressed in electron-volts, The thermal
neutron in part (c) has a kinetic energy of about one fortieth of an electron-volt.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.5
(a) A car and a truck are each moving with the same kinetic energy. Assume that the truck has more mass than the
car. Which has the greater speed? (b) A car and a truck are each moving with the same speed. Which has the greater
kinetic energy?
Because velocity is a relative quantity, you can see that the value of kinetic energy must depend on your frame of
reference. You can generally choose a frame of reference that is suited to the purpose of your analysis and that
simplifies your calculations. One such frame of reference is the one in which the observations of the system are
made (likely an external frame). Another choice is a frame that is attached to, or moves with, the system (likely an
internal frame). The equations for relative motion, discussed in Motion in Two and Three Dimensions, provide a link
to calculating the kinetic energy of an object with respect to different frames of reference.
EXAMPLE 7.7
Kinetic Energy Relative to Different Frames
A 75.0-kg person walks down the central aisle of a subway car at a speed of 1.50 m/s relative to the car, whereas
the train is moving at 15.0 m/s relative to the tracks. (a) What is the person’s kinetic energy relative to the car? (b)
What is the person’s kinetic energy relative to the tracks? (c) What is the person’s kinetic energy relative to a frame
320 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
moving with the person?
Strategy
Since speeds are given, we can use to calculate the person’s kinetic energy. However, in part (a), the person’s
speed is relative to the subway car (as given); in part (b), it is relative to the tracks; and in part (c), it is zero. If we
denote the car frame by C, the track frame by T, and the person by P, the relative velocities in part (b) are related by
We can assume that the central aisle and the tracks lie along the same line, but the direction the
person is walking relative to the car isn’t specified, so we will give an answer for each possibility, ,
as shown in Figure 7.10.
FIGURE 7.10 The possible motions of a person walking in a train are (a) toward the front of the car and (b) toward the back of the car.
Solution
a.
b. Therefore, the two possible values for kinetic energy relative to the track are
and
c. In a frame where as well.
Significance
You can see that the kinetic energy of an object can have very different values, depending on the frame of reference.
However, the kinetic energy of an object can never be negative, since it is the product of the mass and the square of
the speed, both of which are always positive or zero.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.6
You are rowing a boat parallel to the banks of a river. Your kinetic energy relative to the banks is less than your
kinetic energy relative to the water. Are you rowing with or against the current?
The kinetic energy of a particle is a single quantity, but the kinetic energy of a system of particles can sometimes be
divided into various types, depending on the system and its motion. For example, if all the particles in a system have
the same velocity, the system is undergoing translational motion and has translational kinetic energy. If an object is
rotating, it could have rotational kinetic energy, or if it’s vibrating, it could have vibrational kinetic energy. The kinetic
energy of a system, relative to an internal frame of reference, may be called internal kinetic energy. The kinetic
energy associated with random molecular motion may be called thermal energy. These names will be used in later
chapters of the book, when appropriate. Regardless of the name, every kind of kinetic energy is the same physical
quantity, representing energy associated with motion.
Access for free at openstax.org
7.3 • Work-Energy Theorem 321
EXAMPLE 7.8
Special Names for Kinetic Energy
(a) A player lobs a mid-court pass with a 624-g basketball, which covers 15 m in 2 s. What is the basketball’s
horizontal translational kinetic energy while in flight? (b) An average molecule of air, in the basketball in part (a), has
a mass of 29 u, and an average speed of 500 m/s, relative to the basketball. There are about molecules
inside it, moving in random directions, when the ball is properly inflated. What is the average translational kinetic
energy of the random motion of all the molecules inside, relative to the basketball? (c) How fast would the
basketball have to travel relative to the court, as in part (a), so as to have a kinetic energy equal to the amount in
part (b)?
Strategy
In part (a), first find the horizontal speed of the basketball and then use the definition of kinetic energy in terms of
mass and speed, . Then in part (b), convert unified units to kilograms and then use average translational kinetic energy of one molecule, relative to the basketball. Then multiply by the number of
molecules to get the total result. Finally, in part (c), we can substitute the amount of kinetic energy in part (b), and
the mass of the basketball in part (a), into the definition , and solve for v.
Solution
a. to get the
The horizontal speed is (15 m)/(2 s), so the horizontal kinetic energy of the basketball is
b. The average translational kinetic energy of a molecule is
and the total kinetic energy of all the molecules is
c.
Significance
In part (a), this kind of kinetic energy can be called the horizontal kinetic energy of an object (the basketball),
relative to its surroundings (the court). If the basketball were spinning, all parts of it would have not just the average
speed, but it would also have rotational kinetic energy. Part (b) reminds us that this kind of kinetic energy can be
called internal or thermal kinetic energy. Notice that this energy is about a hundred times the energy in part (a). How
to make use of thermal energy will be the subject of the chapters on thermodynamics. In part (c), since the energy in
part (b) is about 100 times that in part (a), the speed should be about 10 times as big, which it is (76 compared to
7.5 m/s).
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply the work-energy theorem to find information about the motion of a particle, given the forces acting
on it
• Use the work-energy theorem to find information about the forces acting on a particle, given information
about its motion
We have discussed how to find the work done on a particle by the forces that act on it, but how is that work
manifested in the motion of the particle? According to Newton’s second law of motion, the sum of all the forces
acting on a particle, or the net force, determines the rate of change in the momentum of the particle, or its motion.
Therefore, we should consider the work done by all the forces acting on a particle, or the net work, to see what
322 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
effect it has on the particle’s motion.
Let’s start by looking at the net work done on a particle as it moves over an infinitesimal displacement, which is the
dot product of the net force and the displacement: Newton’s second law tells us that
so For the mathematical functions describing the motion of a physical
particle, we can rearrange the differentials dt , etc., as algebraic quantities in this expression, that is,
where we substituted the velocity for the time derivative of the displacement and used the commutative property of
the dot product [Equation 2.30]. Since derivatives and integrals of scalars are probably more familiar to you at this
point, we express the dot product in terms of Cartesian coordinates before we integrate between any two points A
and Bon the particle’s trajectory. This gives us the net work done on the particle:
7.8
In the middle step, we used the fact that the square of the velocity is the sum of the squares of its Cartesian
components, and in the last step, we used the definition of the particle’s kinetic energy. This important result is
called the work-energy theorem (Figure 7.11).
WORK-ENERGY THEOREM
The net work done on a particle equals the change in the particle’s kinetic energy:
7.9
FIGURE 7.11 Horse pulls are common events at state fairs. The work done by the horses pulling on the load results in a change in kinetic
energy of the load, ultimately going faster. (credit: modification of work by “Jassen”/ Flickr)
According to this theorem, when an object slows down, its final kinetic energy is less than its initial kinetic energy,
the change in its kinetic energy is negative, and so is the net work done on it. If an object speeds up, the net work
done on it is positive. When calculating the net work, you must include all the forces that act on an object. If you
leave out any forces that act on an object, or if you include any forces that don’t act on it, you will get a wrong result.
The importance of the work-energy theorem, and the further generalizations to which it leads, is that it makes some
types of calculations much simpler to accomplish than they would be by trying to solve Newton’s second law. For
example, in Newton’s Laws of Motion, we found the speed of an object sliding down a frictionless plane by solving
Access for free at openstax.org
7.3 • Work-Energy Theorem 323
Newton’s second law for the acceleration and using kinematic equations for constant acceleration, obtaining
where s is the displacement down the plane.
We can also get this result from the work-energy theorem in Equation 7.1. Since only two forces are acting on the
object-gravity and the normal force-and the normal force doesn't do any work, the net work is just the work done by
gravity. The work dW is the dot product of the force of gravity or and the displacement .
After taking the dot product and integrating from an initial position , one finds the net work
as
to a final position where y is positive up. The work-energy theorem says that this equals the change in kinetic energy:
Using a right triangle, we can see that so the result for the final speed is the same.
What is gained by using the work-energy theorem? The answer is that for a frictionless plane surface, not much.
However, Newton’s second law is easy to solve only for this particular case, whereas the work-energy theorem gives
the final speed for any shaped frictionless surface. For an arbitrary curved surface, the normal force is not constant,
and Newton’s second law may be difficult or impossible to solve analytically. Constant or not, for motion along a
surface, the normal force never does any work, because it’s perpendicular to the displacement. A calculation using
the work-energy theorem avoids this difficulty and applies to more general situations.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Work-Energy Theorem
1. 2. Draw a free-body diagram for each force on the object.
Determine whether or not each force does work over the displacement in the diagram. Be sure to keep any
positive or negative signs in the work done.
3. 4. 5. Add up the total amount of work done by each force.
Set this total work equal to the change in kinetic energy and solve for any unknown parameter.
Check your answers. If the object is traveling at a constant speed or zero acceleration, the total work done
should be zero and match the change in kinetic energy. If the total work is positive, the object must have sped
up or increased kinetic energy. If the total work is negative, the object must have slowed down or decreased
kinetic energy.
EXAMPLE 7.9
Loop-the-Loop
The frictionless track for a toy car includes a loop-the-loop of radius R . How high, measured from the bottom of the
loop, must the car be placed to start from rest on the approaching section of track and go all the way around the
loop?
324 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
FIGURE 7.12 A frictionless track for a toy car has a loop-the-loop in it. How high must the car start so that it can go around the loop without
falling off?
Strategy
The free-body diagram at the final position of the object is drawn in Figure 7.12. The gravitational work is the only
work done over the displacement that is not zero. Since the weight points in the same direction as the net vertical
displacement, the total work done by the gravitational force is positive. From the work-energy theorem, the starting
height determines the speed of the car at the top of the loop,
where the notation is shown in the accompanying figure. At the top of the loop, the normal force and gravity are both
down and the acceleration is centripetal, so
The condition for maintaining contact with the track is that there must be some normal force, however slight; that is,
. Substituting for and N , we can find the condition for .
Solution
Implement the steps in the strategy to arrive at the desired result:
Significance
On the surface of the loop, the normal component of gravity and the normal contact force must provide the
centripetal acceleration of the car going around the loop. The tangential component of gravity slows down or speeds
up the car. A child would find out how high to start the car by trial and error, but now that you know the work-energy
theorem, you can predict the minimum height (as well as other more useful results) from physical principles. By
using the work-energy theorem, you did not have to solve a differential equation to determine the height.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.7
Suppose the radius of the loop-the-loop in Example 7.9 is 15 cm and the toy car starts from rest at a height of 45 cm
above the bottom. What is its speed at the top of the loop?
INTERACTIVE
Watch this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21rollcoas) to see a looping rollercoaster.
In situations where the motion of an object is known, but the values of one or more of the forces acting on it are not
known, you may be able to use the work-energy theorem to get some information about the forces. Work depends
Access for free at openstax.org
7.3 • Work-Energy Theorem 325
on the force and the distance over which it acts, so the information is provided via their product.
EXAMPLE 7.10
Determining a Stopping Force
A bullet has a mass of 40 grains (2.60 g) and a muzzle velocity of 1100 ft./s (335 m/s). It can penetrate eight 1-inch
pine boards, each with thickness 0.75 inches. What is the average stopping force exerted by the wood, as shown in
Figure 7.13?
FIGURE 7.13 The boards exert a force to stop the bullet. As a result, the boards do work and the bullet loses kinetic energy.
Strategy
We can assume that under the general conditions stated, the bullet loses all its kinetic energy penetrating the
boards, so the work-energy theorem says its initial kinetic energy is equal to the average stopping force times the
distance penetrated. The change in the bullet’s kinetic energy and the net work done stopping it are both negative,
so when you write out the work-energy theorem, with the net work equal to the average force times the stopping
distance, that’s what you get. The total thickness of eight 1-inch pine boards that the bullet penetrates is
Solution
Applying the work-energy theorem, we get
so
Significance
We could have used Newton’s second law and kinematics in this example, but the work-energy theorem also
supplies an answer to less simple situations. The penetration of a bullet, fired vertically upward into a block of wood,
is discussed in one section of Asif Shakur’s recent article [“Bullet-Block Science Video Puzzle.
” The Ph ysics T eacher
(January 2015) 53(1): 15-16]. If the bullet is fired dead center into the block, it loses all its kinetic energy and
penetrates slightly farther than if fired off-center. The reason is that if the bullet hits off-center, it has a little kinetic
energy after it stops penetrating, because the block rotates. The work-energy theorem implies that a smaller change
in kinetic energy results in a smaller penetration. You will understand more of the physics in this interesting article
after you finish reading Angular Momentum.
INTERACTIVE
Learn more about work and energy in this PhET simulation (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ramp) called “the ramp.” Try
changing the force pushing the box and the frictional force along the incline. The work and energy plots can be
examined to note the total work done and change in kinetic energy of the box.
326 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
7.4 Power
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Relate the work done during a time interval to the power delivered
• Find the power expended by a force acting on a moving body
The concept of work involves force and displacement; the work-energy theorem relates the net work done on a body
to the difference in its kinetic energy, calculated between two points on its trajectory. None of these quantities or
relations involves time explicitly, yet we know that the time available to accomplish a particular amount of work is
frequently just as important to us as the amount itself. In the chapter-opening figure, several sprinters may have
achieved the same velocity at the finish, and therefore did the same amount of work, but the winner of the race did it
in the least amount of time.
We express the relation between work done and the time interval involved in doing it, by introducing the concept of
power. Since work can vary as a function of time, we first define average power as the work done during a time
interval, divided by the interval,
7.10
Then, we can define the instantaneous power (frequently referred to as just plain power).
POWER
Power is defined as the rate of doing work, or the limit of the average power for time intervals approaching zero,
7.11
If the power is constant over a time interval, the average power for that interval equals the instantaneous power,
and the work done by the agent supplying the power is . If the power during an interval varies with time,
then the work done is the time integral of the power,
The work-energy theorem relates how work can be transformed into kinetic energy. Since there are other forms of
energy as well, as we discuss in the next chapter, we can also define power as the rate of transfer of energy. Work
and energy are measured in units of joules, so power is measured in units of joules per second, which has been
given the SI name watts, abbreviation W: . Another common unit for expressing the power capability of
everyday devices is horsepower: .
EXAMPLE 7.11
Pull-Up Power
An 80-kg army trainee does pull-ups on a horizontal bar (Figure 7.14). It takes the trainee 0.8 seconds to raise the
body from a lower position to where the chin is above the bar. How much power do the trainee’s muscles supply
moving his body from the lower position to where the chin is above the bar? (Hint: Make reasonable estimates for
any quantities needed.)
Access for free at openstax.org
7.4 • Power 327
FIGURE 7.14 What is the power expended in doing ten pull-ups in ten seconds?
Strategy
The work done against gravity, going up or down a distance , is Let’s assume that assume that the arms comprise 10% of the body mass and are not included in the moving mass. With these
assumptions, we can calculate the work done.
Solution
The result we get, applying our assumptions, is
Also,
Significance
This is typical for power expenditure in strenuous exercise; in everyday units, it’s somewhat more than one
horsepower
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 7.8
Estimate the power expended by a weightlifter raising a 150-kg barbell 2 m in 3 s.
The power involved in moving a body can also be expressed in terms of the forces acting on it. If a force body that is displaced in a time dt , the power expended by the force is
acts on a
7.12
where is the velocity of the body. The fact that the limits implied by the derivatives exist, for the motion of a real
body, justifies the rearrangement of the infinitesimals.
EXAMPLE 7.12
Automotive Power Driving Uphill
How much power must an automobile engine expend to move a 1200-kg car up a 15% grade at 90 km/h (Figure
7.15)? Assume that 25% of this power is dissipated overcoming air resistance and friction.
328 7 • Work and Kinetic Energy
FIGURE 7.15 We want to calculate the power needed to move a car up a hill at constant speed.
Strategy
At constant velocity, there is no change in kinetic energy, so the net work done to move the car is zero. Therefore the
power supplied by the engine to move the car equals the power expended against gravity and air resistance. By
assumption, 75% of the power is supplied against gravity, which equals where is the angle of
the incline. A 15% grade means This reasoning allows us to solve for the power required.
Solution
Carrying out the suggested steps, we find
or
or about 78 hp. (You should supply the steps used to convert units.)
Significance
This is a reasonable amount of power for the engine of a small to mid-size car to supply Note
that this is only the power expended to move the car. Much of the engine’s power goes elsewhere, for example, into
waste heat. That’s why cars need radiators. Any remaining power could be used for acceleration, or to operate the
car’s accessories.
Access for free at openstax.org
7 • Chapter Review 329
Chapter Review
Key Terms
average power work done in a time interval divided
by the time interval
kinetic energy energy of motion, one-half an object’s
mass times the square of its speed
net work work done by all the forces acting on an
object
Key Equations
Work done by a force over an infinitesimal displacement
power (or instantaneous power) rate of doing work
work done when a force acts on something that
undergoes a displacement from one position to
another
work-energy theorem net work done on a particle is
equal to the change in its kinetic energy
Work done by a force acting along a path from Ato B
Work done by a constant force of kinetic friction
Work done going from Ato Bby Earth’s gravity, near its surface
Work done going from Ato Bby one-dimensional spring force
Kinetic energy of a non-relativistic particle
Work-energy theorem
Power as rate of doing work
Power as the dot product of force and velocity
Summary
7.1 Work
• The infinitesimal increment of work done by a
force, acting over an infinitesimal displacement,
is the dot product of the force and the
displacement.
• The work done by a force, acting over a finite
path, is the integral of the infinitesimal
increments of work done along the path.
• The work done ag ainsta force is the negative of
the work done b y the force.
• The work done by a normal or frictional contact
force must be determined in each particular
case.
• The work done by the force of gravity, on an
object near the surface of Earth, depends only on
the weight of the object and the difference in
height through which it moved.
• The work done by a spring force, acting from an
initial position to a final position, depends only
on the spring constant and the squares of those
positions.
7.2 Kinetic Energy
• The kinetic energy of a particle is the product of
one-half its mass and the square of its speed, for
non-relativistic speeds.
• The kinetic energy of a system is the sum of the
kinetic energies of all the particles in the system.
• Kinetic energy is relative to a frame of reference,
is always positive, and is sometimes given
special names for different types of motion.
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
• Because the net force on a particle is equal to its
mass times the derivative of its velocity, the
integral for the net work done on the particle is
equal to the change in the particle’s kinetic
energy. This is the work-energy theorem.
• You can use the work-energy theorem to find
certain properties of a system, without having to
solve the differential equation for Newton’s
second law.
7.4 Power
• Power is the rate of doing work; that is, the
derivative of work with respect to time.
• Alternatively, the work done, during a time
interval, is the integral of the power supplied
over the time interval.
• The power delivered by a force, acting on a
moving particle, is the dot product of the force
330 7 • Chapter Review
and the particle’s velocity.
Conceptual Questions
7.1 Work
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Give an example of something we think of as
work in everyday circumstances that is not work
in the scientific sense. Is energy transferred or
changed in form in your example? If so, explain
how this is accomplished without doing work.
Give an example of a situation in which there is a
force and a displacement, but the force does no
work. Explain why it does no work.
Describe a situation in which a force is exerted
for a long time but does no work. Explain.
A body moves in a circle at constant speed. Does
the centripetal force that accelerates the body
do any work? Explain.
Suppose you throw a ball upward and catch it
when it returns at the same height. How much
work does the gravitational force do on the ball
over its entire trip?
Why is it more difficult to do sit-ups while on a
slant board than on a horizontal surface? (See
below.)
7. As a young man, Tarzan climbed up a vine to
reach his tree house. As he got older, he decided
to build and use a staircase instead. Since the
work of the gravitational force mg is path
independent, what did the King of the Apes gain
Access for free at openstax.org
in using stairs?
7.2 Kinetic Energy
8. A particle of m has a velocity of
Is its kinetic energy given by
If not, what is the
9. 10. correct expression?
One particle has mass m and a second particle
has mass 2m. The second particle is moving
with speed v and the first with speed 2v. How do
their kinetic energies compare?
A person drops a pebble of mass from a
height h , and it hits the floor with kinetic energy
K . The person drops another pebble of mass
from a height of 2h , and it hits the floor with the
same kinetic energy K . How do the masses of
the pebbles compare?
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
11. The person shown below does work on the lawn
mower. Under what conditions would the mower
gain energy from the person pushing the mower?
Under what conditions would it lose energy?
12. 13. 14. 15. Work done on a system puts energy into it. Work
done by a system removes energy from it. Give
an example for each statement.
Two marbles of masses m and 2m are dropped
from a height h . Compare their kinetic energies
when they reach the ground.
Compare the work required to accelerate a car
of mass 2000 kg from 30.0 to 40.0 km/h with
that required for an acceleration from 50.0 to
60.0 km/h.
Suppose you are jogging at constant velocity.
Are you doing any work on the environment and
vice versa?
16. Two forces act to double the speed of a particle,
initially moving with kinetic energy of 1 J. One of
the forces does 4 J of work. How much work
does the other force do?
19. 7.4 Power
17. 18. Most electrical appliances are rated in watts.
Does this rating depend on how long the
appliance is on? (When off, it is a zero-watt
device.) Explain in terms of the definition of
power.
Explain, in terms of the definition of power, why
energy consumption is sometimes listed in
kilowatt-hours rather than joules. What is the
Problems
7.1 Work
20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. How much work does a supermarket checkout
attendant do on a can of soup he pushes 0.600
m horizontally with a force of 5.00 N?
A 75.0-kg person climbs stairs, gaining 2.50 m in
height. Find the work done to accomplish this
task.
(a) Calculate the work done on a 1500-kg
elevator car by its cable to lift it 40.0 m at
constant speed, assuming friction averages 100
N. (b) What is the work done on the elevator car
by the gravitational force in this process? (c)
What is the total work done on the elevator car?
Suppose a car travels 108 km at a speed of 30.0
m/s, and uses 2.0 gal of gasoline. Only 30% of
the gasoline goes into useful work by the force
that keeps the car moving at constant speed
despite friction. (The energy content of gasoline
is about 140 MJ/gal.) (a) What is the magnitude
of the force exerted to keep the car moving at
constant speed? (b) If the required force is
directly proportional to speed, how many gallons
will be used to drive 108 km at a speed of 28.0
m/s?
Calculate the work done by an 85.0-kg man who
pushes a crate 4.00 m up along a ramp that makes
an angle of with the horizontal (see below). He
exerts a force of 500 N on the crate parallel to the
ramp and moves at a constant speed. Be certain to
include the work he does on the crate and on his
body to get up the ramp.
28. 29. 30. 7 • Chapter Review 331
relationship between these two energy units?
A spark of static electricity, such as that you
might receive from a doorknob on a cold dry day,
may carry a few hundred watts of power. Explain
why you are not injured by such a spark.
Does the work done in lifting an object depend
on how fast it is lifted? Does the power
expended depend on how fast it is lifted?
Can the power expended by a force be negative?
How can a 50-W light bulb use more energy than
a 1000-W oven?
How much work is done by the boy pulling his sister
30.0 m in a wagon as shown below?
A shopper pushes a grocery cart 20.0 m at
constant speed on level ground, against a 35.0 N
frictional force. He pushes in a direction
below the horizontal. (a) What is the work done
on the cart by friction? (b) What is the work done
on the cart by the gravitational force? (c) What is
the work done on the cart by the shopper? (d)
Find the force the shopper exerts, using energy
considerations. (e) What is the total work done
on the cart?
Suppose the ski patrol lowers a rescue sled and
victim, having a total mass of 90.0 kg, down a
slope at constant speed, as shown below.
332 7 • Chapter Review
The coefficient of friction between the sled and
the snow is 0.100. (a) How much work is done
by friction as the sled moves 30.0 m along the
hill? (b) How much work is done by the rope on
the sled in this distance? (c) What is the work
done by the gravitational force on the sled? (d)
What is the total work done?
31. 32. 33. 34. 35. A constant 20-N force pushes a small ball in the
direction of the force over a distance of 5.0 m.
What is the work done by the force?
A toy cart is pulled a distance of 6.0 m in a
straight line across the floor. The force pulling
the cart has a magnitude of 20 N and is directed
at above the horizontal. What is the work
done by this force?
A 5.0-kg box rests on a horizontal surface. The
coefficient of kinetic friction between the box
and surface is A horizontal force
pulls the box at constant velocity for 10 cm. Find
the work done by (a) the applied horizontal
force, (b) the frictional force, and (c) the net
force.
A sled plus passenger with total mass 50 kg is
pulled 20 m across the snow constant velocity by a force directed at
above
the horizontal. Calculate (a) the work of the
applied force, (b) the work of friction, and (c) the
total work.
Suppose that the sled plus passenger of the
preceding problem is pushed 20 m across the
Access for free at openstax.org
36. 37. 38. 39. snow at constant velocity by a force directed
below the horizontal. Calculate (a) the work of
the applied force, (b) the work of friction, and (c)
the total work.
How much work does the force
do on a particle as it moves
from to
How much work is done against the gravitational
force on a 5.0-kg briefcase when it is carried
from the ground floor to the roof of the Empire
State Building, a vertical climb of 380 m?
It takes 500 J of work to compress a spring 10
cm. What is the force constant of the spring?
A bungee cord is essentially a very long rubber
band that can stretch up to four times its
unstretched length. However, its spring constant
varies over its stretch [see Menz, P.G. “The
Physics of Bungee Jumping.
” The Ph ysics
T eacher (November 1993) 31: 483-487]. Take
the length of the cord to be along the x-direction
and define the stretch x as the length of the cord
lminus its un-stretched length that is,
(see below). Suppose a particular
bungee cord has a spring constant, for
, of and for
, of (Recall that the
spring constant is the slope of the force F(x)
versus its stretch x.) (a) What is the tension in
the cord when the stretch is 16.7 m (the
maximum desired for a given jump)? (b) How
much work must be done against the elastic
force of the bungee cord to stretch it 16.7 m?
40. 41. 42. 43. FIGURE 7.16 (credit: modification of work by Graeme
Churchard)
A bungee cord exerts a nonlinear elastic force of
magnitude where x is the
distance the cord is stretched,
and How much work must
be done on the cord to stretch it 16.7 m?
Engineers desire to model the magnitude of the
elastic force of a bungee cord using the equation
,
where x is the stretch of the cord along its length
and a is a constant. If it takes 22.0 kJ of work to
stretch the cord by 16.7 m, determine the value
of the constant a.
A particle moving in the xy-plane is subject to a
force
where x and y are in meters. Calculate the work
done on the particle by this force, as it moves in
a straight line from the point (3 m, 4 m) to the
point (6 m, 8 m).
A particle moves along a curved path
from
to subject to a tangential
force of variable magnitude
How much work
does the force do? (Hint: Consult a table of
integrals or use a numerical integration
program.)
7 • Chapter Review 333
7.2 Kinetic Energy
44. 45. 46. 47. Compare the kinetic energy of a 20,000-kg truck
moving at 110 km/h with that of an 80.0-kg
astronaut in orbit moving at 27,500 km/h.
(a) How fast must a 3000-kg elephant move to
have the same kinetic energy as a 65.0-kg
sprinter running at 10.0 m/s? (b) Discuss how
the larger energies needed for the movement of
larger animals would relate to metabolic rates.
Estimate the kinetic energy of a 90,000-ton
aircraft carrier moving at a speed of at 30 knots.
You will need to look up the definition of a
nautical mile to use in converting the unit for
speed, where 1 knot equals 1 nautical mile per
hour. Furthermore for this problem, 1 ton is
equivalent to 2,000 pounds.
Calculate the kinetic energies of (a) a 2000.0-kg
automobile moving at 100.0 km/h; (b) an 80.-kg
runner sprinting at 10. m/s; and (c) a
electron moving at
48. 49. A 5.0-kg body has three times the kinetic energy
of an 8.0-kg body. Calculate the ratio of the
speeds of these bodies.
An 8.0-g bullet has a speed of 800 m/s. (a) What
is its kinetic energy? (b) What is its kinetic
energy if the speed is halved?
7.3 Work-Energy Theorem
50. (a) Calculate the force needed to bring a 950-kg
car to rest from a speed of 90.0 km/h in a
distance of 120 m (a fairly typical distance for a
non-panic stop). (b) Suppose instead the car hits
a concrete abutment at full speed and is brought
to a stop in 2.00 m. Calculate the force exerted
on the car and compare it with the force found in
part (a).
A car’s bumper is designed to withstand a
4.0-km/h (1.1-m/s) collision with an immovable
object without damage to the body of the car.
The bumper cushions the shock by absorbing
the force over a distance. Calculate the
magnitude of the average force on a bumper that
collapses 0.200 m while bringing a 900-kg car to
rest from an initial speed of 1.1 m/s.
Boxing gloves are padded to lessen the force of
a blow. (a) Calculate the force exerted by a
boxing glove on an opponent’s face, if the glove
and face compress 7.50 cm during a blow in
51. 52. 
334 7 • Chapter Review
53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. which the 7.00-kg arm and glove are brought to
rest from an initial speed of 10.0 m/s. (b)
Calculate the force exerted by an identical blow
in the days when no gloves were used, and the
knuckles and face would compress only 2.00
cm. Assume the change in mass by removing the
glove is negligible. (c) Discuss the magnitude of
the force with glove on. Does it seem high
enough to cause damage even though it is lower
than the force with no glove?
Using energy considerations, calculate the
average force a 60.0-kg sprinter exerts
backward on the track to accelerate from 2.00 to
8.00 m/s in a distance of 25.0 m, if he
encounters a headwind that exerts an average
force of 30.0 N against him.
A 5.0-kg box has an acceleration of
when it is pulled by a horizontal force across a
surface with Find the work done
over a distance of 10 cm by (a) the horizontal
force, (b) the frictional force, and (c) the net
force. (d) What is the change in kinetic energy of
the box?
A constant 10-N horizontal force is applied to a
20-kg cart at rest on a level floor. If friction is
negligible, what is the speed of the cart when it
has been pushed 8.0 m?
In the preceding problem, the 10-N force is
applied at an angle of below the horizontal.
What is the speed of the cart when it has been
pushed 8.0 m?
Compare the work required to stop a 100-kg
crate sliding at 1.0 m/s and an 8.0-g bullet
traveling at 500 m/s.
A wagon with its passenger sits at the top of a
hill. The wagon is given a slight push and rolls
100 m down a incline to the bottom of the
hill. What is the wagon’s speed when it reaches
the end of the incline. Assume that the retarding
force of friction is negligible.
An 8.0-g bullet with a speed of 800 m/s is shot
into a wooden block and penetrates 20 cm
before stopping. What is the average force of the
wood on the bullet? Assume the block does not
move.
A 2.0-kg block starts with a speed of 10 m/s at
the bottom of a plane inclined at to the
horizontal. The coefficient of sliding friction
between the block and plane is (a)
Access for free at openstax.org
61. 62. 63. 64. 65. Use the work-energy principle to determine how
far the block slides along the plane before
momentarily coming to rest. (b) After stopping,
the block slides back down the plane. What is its
speed when it reaches the bottom? (Hint: For
the round trip, only the force of friction does
work on the block.)
When a 3.0-kg block is pushed against a
massless spring of force constant
the spring is compressed 8.0
cm. The block is released, and it slides 2.0 m
(from the point at which it is released) across a
horizontal surface before friction stops it. What
is the coefficient of kinetic friction between the
block and the surface?
A small block of mass 200 g starts at rest at A,
slides to B where its speed is
then slides along the horizontal surface a
distance 10 m before coming to rest at C. (See
below.) (a) What is the work of friction along the
curved surface? (b) What is the coefficient of
kinetic friction along the horizontal surface?
A small object is placed at the top of an incline
that is essentially frictionless. The object slides
down the incline onto a rough horizontal surface,
where it stops in 5.0 s after traveling 60 m. (a)
What is the speed of the object at the bottom of
the incline and its acceleration along the
horizontal surface? (b) What is the height of the
incline?
When released, a 100-g block slides down the
path shown below, reaching the bottom with a
speed of 4.0 m/s. How much work does the
force of friction do?
A 0.22LR-caliber bullet like that mentioned in
Example 7.10 is fired into a door made of a
7 • Chapter Review 335
single thickness of 1-inch pine boards. How fast
would the bullet be traveling after it penetrated
through the door?
66. A sled starts from rest at the top of a snow-
covered incline that makes a angle with the
horizontal. After sliding 75 m down the slope, its
speed is 14 m/s. Use the work-energy theorem
to calculate the coefficient of kinetic friction
between the runners of the sled and the snowy
surface.
7.4 Power
67. 68. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. A person in good physical condition can put out
100 W of useful power for several hours at a
stretch, perhaps by pedaling a mechanism that
drives an electric generator. Neglecting any
problems of generator efficiency and practical
considerations such as resting time: (a) How
many people would it take to run a 4.00-kW
electric clothes dryer? (b) How many people
would it take to replace a large electric power
plant that generates 800 MW?
What is the cost of operating a 3.00-W electric
clock for a year if the cost of electricity is
$0.0900 per ?
A large household air conditioner may consume
15.0 kW of power. What is the cost of operating
this air conditioner 3.00 h per day for 30.0 d if
the cost of electricity is $0.110 per ?
(a) What is the average power consumption in
watts of an appliance that uses 5.00 of
energy per day? (b) How many joules of energy
does this appliance consume in a year?
(a) What is the average useful power output of a
person who does of useful work in
8.00 h? (b) Working at this rate, how long will it
take this person to lift 2000 kg of bricks 1.50 m
to a platform? (Work done to lift his body can be
omitted because it is not considered useful
output here.)
A 500-kg dragster accelerates from rest to a
final speed of 110 m/s in 400 m (about a quarter
of a mile) and encounters an average frictional
force of 1200 N. What is its average power
output in watts and horsepower if this takes
7.30 s?
(a) How long will it take an 850-kg car with a
useful power output of 40.0 hp (1 hp equals 746
W) to reach a speed of 15.0 m/s, neglecting
friction? (b) How long will this acceleration take
74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. if the car also climbs a 3.00-m high hill in the
process?
(a) Find the useful power output of an elevator
motor that lifts a 2500-kg load a height of 35.0
m in 12.0 s, if it also increases the speed from
rest to 4.00 m/s. Note that the total mass of the
counterbalanced system is 10,000 kg—so that
only 2500 kg is raised in height, but the full
10,000 kg is accelerated. (b) What does it cost, if
electricity is $0.0900 per ?
(a) How long would it take a
airplane with engines that produce 100 MW of
power to reach a speed of 250 m/s and an
altitude of 12.0 km if air resistance were
negligible? (b) If it actually takes 900 s, what is
the power? (c) Given this power, what is the
average force of air resistance if the airplane
takes 1200 s? (Hint: You must find the distance
the plane travels in 1200 s assuming constant
acceleration.)
Calculate the power output needed for a 950-kg
car to climb a slope at a constant 30.0 m/s
while encountering wind resistance and friction
totaling 600 N.
A man of mass 80 kg runs up a flight of stairs 20
m high in 10 s. (a) how much power is used to lift
the man? (b) If the man’s body is 25% efficient,
how much power does he expend?
The man of the preceding problem consumes
approximately (2500 food
calories) of energy per day in maintaining a
constant weight. What is the average power he
produces over a day? Compare this with his
power production when he runs up the stairs.
An electron in a television tube is accelerated
uniformly from rest to a speed of
over a distance of 2.5 cm. What is the power
delivered to the electron at the instant that its
displacement is 1.0 cm?
Coal is lifted out of a mine a vertical distance of
50 m by an engine that supplies 500 W to a
conveyor belt. How much coal per minute can be
brought to the surface? Ignore the effects of
friction.
A girl pulls her 15-kg wagon along a flat sidewalk
by applying a 10-N force at to the horizontal.
Assume that friction is negligible and that the
wagon starts from rest. (a) How much work does
the girl do on the wagon in the first 2.0 s. (b)
336 7 • Chapter Review
How much instantaneous power does she exert
at ?
82. A typical automobile engine has an efficiency of
25%. Suppose that the engine of a 1000-kg
automobile has a maximum power output of 140
hp. What is the maximum grade that the
automobile can climb at 50 km/h if the frictional
retarding force on it is 300 N?
Additional Problems
84. A cart is pulled a distance Don a flat, horizontal
surface by a constant force Fthat acts at an angle
with the horizontal direction. The other forces on the
object during this time are gravity ( ), normal
forces ( ) and ( ), and rolling frictions
and , as shown below. What is the work done by
each force?
85. Consider a particle on which several forces act,
one of which is known to be constant in time:
As a result, the particle
moves along the x-axis from to in
some time interval. What is the work done by
86. 87. 88. ?
Consider a particle on which several forces act,
one of which is known to be constant in time:
As a result, the particle
moves first along the x-axis from to
and then parallel to the y-axis from
to What is the work done by ?
Consider a particle on which several forces act,
one of which is known to be constant in time:
As a result, the particle
moves along a straight path from a Cartesian
coordinate of (0 m, 0 m) to (5 m, 6 m). What is
the work done by ?
Consider a particle on which a force acts that
depends on the position of the particle. This
force is given by Find the
work done by this force when the particle moves
Access for free at openstax.org
83. 89. 90. When jogging at 13 km/h on a level surface, a
70-kg man uses energy at a rate of
approximately 850 W. Using the facts that the
“human engine” is approximately 25% efficient,
determine the rate at which this man uses
energy when jogging up a slope at this
same speed. Assume that the frictional retarding
force is the same in both cases.
from the origin to a point 5 meters to the right on
the x-axis.
A boy pulls a 5-kg cart with a 20-N force at an
angle of above the horizontal for a length of
time. Over this time frame, the cart moves a
distance of 12 m on the horizontal floor. (a) Find
the work done on the cart by the boy. (b) What
will be the work done by the boy if he pulled with
the same force horizontally instead of at an
angle of above the horizontal over the same
distance?
A crate of mass 200 kg is to be brought from a
site on the ground floor to a third floor
apartment. The workers know that they can
either use the elevator first, then slide it along
the third floor to the apartment, or first slide the
crate to another location marked C below, and
then take the elevator to the third floor and slide
it on the third floor a shorter distance. The
trouble is that the third floor is very rough
compared to the ground floor. Given that the
coefficient of kinetic friction between the crate
and the ground floor is 0.100 and between the
crate and the third floor surface is 0.300, find
the work needed by the workers for each path
shown from Ato E . Assume that the force the
workers need to do is just enough to slide the
crate at constant velocity (zero acceleration).
Not e: The work by the elevator against the force
of gravity is not done by the workers.
94. 95. 91. 92. 93. A hockey puck of mass 0.17 kg is shot across a
rough floor with the roughness different at
different places, which can be described by a
position-dependent coefficient of kinetic
friction. For a puck moving along the x-axis, the
coefficient of kinetic friction is the following
function of x, where x is in m:
Find the work done by the
kinetic frictional force on the hockey puck when
it has moved (a) from to , and (b)
from to .
A horizontal force of 20 N is required to keep a
5.0 kg box traveling at a constant speed up a
frictionless incline for a vertical height change of
3.0 m. (a) What is the work done by gravity
during this change in height? (b) What is the
work done by the normal force? (c) What is the
work done by the horizontal force?
A 7.0-kg box slides along a horizontal
frictionless floor at 1.7 m/s and collides with a
relatively massless spring that compresses 23
cm before the box comes to a stop. (a) How
much kinetic energy does the box have before it
collides with the spring? (b) Calculate the work
done by the spring. (c) Determine the spring
Challenge Problems
99. Shown below is a 40-kg crate that is pushed at
constant velocity a distance 8.0 m along a
incline by the horizontal force The coefficient
of kinetic friction between the crate and the
incline is Calculate the work done by
(a) the applied force, (b) the frictional force, (c)
the gravitational force, and (d) the net force.
96. 97. 98. 100. 7 • Chapter Review 337
constant of the spring.
You are driving your car on a straight road with a
coefficient of friction between the tires and the
road of 0.55. A large piece of debris falls in front
of your view and you immediate slam on the
brakes, leaving a skid mark of 30.5 m (100-feet)
long before coming to a stop. A policeman sees
your car stopped on the road, looks at the skid
mark, and gives you a ticket for traveling over
the 13.4 m/s (30 mph) speed limit. Should you
fight the speeding ticket in court?
A crate is being pushed across a rough floor
surface. If no force is applied on the crate, the
crate will slow down and come to a stop. If the
crate of mass 50 kg moving at speed 8 m/s
comes to rest in 10 seconds, what is the rate at
which the frictional force on the crate takes
energy away from the crate?
Suppose a horizontal force of 20 N is required to
maintain a speed of 8 m/s of a 50 kg crate. (a)
What is the power of this force? (b) Note that the
acceleration of the crate is zero despite the fact
that 20 N force acts on the crate horizontally.
What happens to the energy given to the crate as
a result of the work done by this 20 N force?
Grains from a hopper falls at a rate of 10 kg/s
vertically onto a conveyor belt that is moving
horizontally at a constant speed of 2 m/s. (a)
What force is needed to keep the conveyor belt
moving at the constant velocity? (b) What is the
minimum power of the motor driving the
conveyor belt?
A cyclist in a race must climb a hill at a speed
of 8 m/s. If the mass of the bike and the biker
together is 80 kg, what must be the power
output of the biker to achieve the goal?
The surface of the preceding problem is
modified so that the coefficient of kinetic friction
338 7 • Chapter Review
101. is decreased. The same horizontal force is
applied to the crate, and after being pushed 8.0
m, its speed is 5.0 m/s. How much work is now
done by the force of friction? Assume that the
crate starts at rest.
The force F (x) varies with position, as shown
below. Find the work done by this force on a
particle as it moves from to
102. 103. 104. Find the work done by the same force in
Example 7.4, between the same points,
, over a circular
arc of radius 2 m, centered at (0, 2 m). Evaluate
the path integral using Cartesian coordinates.
(Hint: You will probably need to consult a table
of integrals.)
Answer the preceding problem using polar
coordinates.
Find the work done by the same force in
Example 7.4, between the same points,
, over a circular
arc of radius 2 m, centered at (2 m, 0). Evaluate
the path integral using Cartesian coordinates.
Access for free at openstax.org
105. 106. 107. 108. (Hint: You will probably need to consult a table
of integrals.)
Answer the preceding problem using polar
coordinates.
Constant power Pis delivered to a car of mass m
by its engine. Show that if air resistance can be
ignored, the distance covered in a time tby the
car, starting from rest, is given by
Suppose that the air resistance a car encounters
is independent of its speed. When the car travels
at 15 m/s, its engine delivers 20 hp to its
wheels. (a) What is the power delivered to the
wheels when the car travels at 30 m/s? (b) How
much energy does the car use in covering 10 km
at 15 m/s? At 30 m/s? Assume that the engine is
25% efficient. (c) Answer the same questions if
the force of air resistance is proportional to the
speed of the automobile. (d) What do these
results, plus your experience with gasoline
consumption, tell you about air resistance?
Consider a linear spring, as in Figure 7.7(a), with
mass Muniformly distributed along its length.
The left end of the spring is fixed, but the right
end, at the equilibrium position is moving
with speed v in the x-direction. What is the total
kinetic energy of the spring? (Hint: First express
the kinetic energy of an infinitesimal element of
the spring dm in terms of the total mass,
equilibrium length, speed of the right-hand end,
and position along the spring; then integrate.)
CHAPTER 8
Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
FIGURE 8.1 Shown here is part of a Ball Machine sculpture by George Rhoads. A ball in this contraption is lifted, rolls, falls, bounces, and
collides with various objects, but throughout its travels, its kinetic energy changes in definite, predictable amounts, which depend on its
position and the objects with which it interacts. (credit: modification of work by Roland Tanglao)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
8.1 Potential Energy of a System
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
8.3 Conservation of Energy
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
8.5 Sources of Energy
INTRODUCTION
In George Rhoads’ rolling ball sculpture, the principle of conservation of energy governs the
changes in the ball’s kinetic energy and relates them to changes and transfers for other types of energy associated
with the ball’s interactions. In this chapter, we introduce the important concept of potential energy. This will enable
us to formulate the law of conservation of mechanical energy and to apply it to simple systems, making solving
problems easier. In the final section on sources of energy, we will consider energy transfers and the general law of
conservation of energy. Throughout this book, the law of conservation of energy will be applied in increasingly more
detail, as you encounter more complex and varied systems, and other forms of energy.
8.1 Potential Energy of a System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Relate the difference of potential energy to work done on a particle for a system without friction or air
drag
• Explain the meaning of the zero of the potential energy function for a system
• Calculate and apply the gravitational potential energy for an object near Earth’s surface and the elastic
potential energy of a mass-spring system
In Work, we saw that the work done on an object by the constant gravitational force, near the surface of Earth, over
340 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
any displacement is a function only of the difference in the positions of the end-points of the displacement. This
property allows us to define a different kind of energy for the system than its kinetic energy, which is called
potential energy. We consider various properties and types of potential energy in the following subsections.
Potential Energy Basics
In Motion in Two and Three Dimensions, we analyzed the motion of a projectile, like kicking a football in Figure 8.2.
For this example, let’s ignore friction and air resistance and begin the analysis immediately after the kick, at the start
of the projectile motion of the ball. As the football rises, the work done by the gravitational force on the football is
negative, because the ball’s displacement is positive vertically and the force due to gravity is negative vertically. We
also noted that the ball slowed down until it reached its highest point in the motion, thereby decreasing the ball’s
kinetic energy. This loss in kinetic energy translates to a gain in gravitational potential energy of the football-Earth
system.
As the football falls toward Earth, the work done on the football is now positive, because the displacement and the
gravitational force both point vertically downward. The ball also speeds up, which indicates an increase in kinetic
energy. Therefore, energy is converted from gravitational potential energy back into kinetic energy.
FIGURE 8.2 As a football starts its descent toward the wide receiver, gravitational potential energy is converted back into kinetic energy.
Based on this scenario, we can define the difference of potential energy from point Ato point Bas the negative of
the work done:
8.1
This formula explicitly states a potential energy difference, not just an absolute potential energy. Therefore, we
need to define potential energy at a given position in such a way as to state standard values of potential energy on
their own, rather than potential energy differences. We do this by rewriting the potential energy function in terms of
an arbitrary constant,
8.2
The choice of the potential energy at a starting location of is made out of convenience in the given problem. Most
importantly, whatever choice is made should be stated and kept consistent throughout the given problem. There are
some well-accepted choices of initial potential energy. For example, the lowest height in a problem is usually
defined as zero potential energy, or if an object is in space, the farthest point away from the system is often defined
as zero potential energy. Then, the potential energy, with respect to zero at is just
As long as there is no friction or air resistance, the change in kinetic energy of the football equals negative of the
change in gravitational potential energy of the football. This can be generalized to any potential energy:
8.3
Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 341
Let’s look at a specific example, choosing zero potential energy for gravitational potential energy at convenient
points.
EXAMPLE 8.1
Basic Properties of Potential Energy
A particle moves along the x-axis under the action of a force given by difference in its potential energy as it moves from to at with respect to a given 0.5 J of potential energy at ?
Strategy
(a) The difference in potential energy is the negative of the work done, as defined by Equation 8.1. The work is
defined in the previous chapter as the dot product of the force with the distance. Since the particle is moving
forward in the x-direction, the dot product simplifies to a multiplication ( ). To find the total work done, we
need to integrate the function between the given limits. After integration, we can state the work or the change in
potential energy. (b) The potential energy function, with respect to zero at , is the indefinite integral
encountered in part (a), with the constant of integration determined from Equation 8.3. Then, we substitute the
x-value into the function of potential energy to calculate the potential energy at
Solution
a. , where . (a) What is the
? (b) What is the particle’s potential energy
The work done by the given force as the particle moves from coordinate x to in one dimension is
Substituting this expression into Equation 8.1, we obtain
b. The indefinite integral for the potential energy function in part (a) is
and we want the constant to be determined by
Thus, the potential energy with respect to zero at is just
Therefore, the potential energy at is
Significance
In this one-dimensional example, any function we can integrate, independent of path, is conservative. Notice how
we applied the definition of potential energy difference to determine the potential energy function with respect to
zero at a chosen point. Also notice that the potential energy, as determined in part (b), at is
and at is ; their difference is the result in part (a).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.1
In Example 8.1, what are the potential energies of the particle at ? Verify that the difference of potential energy is still 7 J.
and with respect to zero at
342 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Systems of Several Particles
In general, a system of interest could consist of several particles. The difference in the potential energy of the
system is the negative of the work done by gravitational or elastic forces, which, as we will see in the next section,
are conservative forces. The potential energy difference depends only on the initial and final positions of the
particles, and on some parameters that characterize the interaction (like mass for gravity or the spring constant for a
Hooke’s law force).
It is important to remember that potential energy is a property of the interactions between objects in a chosen
system, and not just a property of each object. This is especially true for electric forces, although in the examples of
potential energy we consider below, parts of the system are either so big (like Earth, compared to an object on its
surface) or so small (like a massless spring), that the changes those parts undergo are negligible when included in
the system.
Types of Potential Energy
For each type of interaction present in a system, you can label a corresponding type of potential energy. The total
potential energy of the system is the sum of the potential energies of all the types. (This follows from the additive
property of the dot product in the expression for the work done.) Let’s look at some specific examples of types of
potential energy discussed in Work. First, we consider each of these forces when acting separately, and then when
both act together.
Gravitational potential energy near Earth’s surface
The system of interest consists of our planet, Earth, and one or more particles near its surface (or bodies small
enough to be considered as particles, compared to Earth). The gravitational force on each particle (or body) is just
its weight mg near the surface of Earth, acting vertically down. According to Newton’s third law, each particle exerts
a force on Earth of equal magnitude but in the opposite direction. Newton’s second law tells us that the magnitude
of the acceleration produced by each of these forces on Earth is mg divided by Earth’s mass. Since the ratio of the
mass of any ordinary object to the mass of Earth is vanishingly small, the motion of Earth can be completely
neglected. Therefore, we consider this system to be a group of single-particle systems, subject to the uniform
gravitational force of Earth.
In Work, the work done on a body by Earth’s uniform gravitational force, near its surface, depended on the mass of
the body, the acceleration due to gravity, and the difference in height the body traversed, as given by Equation 7.4.
By definition, this work is the negative of the difference in the gravitational potential energy, so that difference is
8.4
You can see from this that the gravitational potential energy function, near Earth’s surface, is
8.5
You can choose the value of the constant, as described in the discussion of Equation 8.2; however, for solving most
problems, the most convenient constant to choose is zero for when which is the lowest vertical position in
the problem.
EXAMPLE 8.2
Gravitational Potential Energy of a Hiker
The summit of Great Blue Hill in Milton, MA, is 147 m above its base and has an elevation above sea level of 195 m
(Figure 8.3). (Its Native American name, Massachuset t , was adopted by settlers for naming the Bay Colony and state
near its location.) A 75-kg hiker ascends from the base to the summit. What is the gravitational potential energy of
the hiker-Earth system with respect to zero gravitational potential energy at base height, when the hiker is (a) at the
base of the hill, (b) at the summit, and (c) at sea level, afterward?
Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 343
FIGURE 8.3 Sketch of the profile of Great Blue Hill, Milton, MA. The altitudes of the three levels are indicated.
Strategy
First, we need to pick an origin for the y-axis and then determine the value of the constant that makes the potential
energy zero at the height of the base. Then, we can determine the potential energies from Equation 8.5, based on
the relationship between the zero potential energy height and the height at which the hiker is located.
Solution
a. Let’s choose the origin for the y-axis at base height, where we also want the zero of potential energy to be.
This choice makes the constant equal to zero and
b. At the summit, , so
c. At sea level, , so
Significance
Besides illustrating the use of Equation 8.4 and Equation 8.5, the values of gravitational potential energy we found
are reasonable. The gravitational potential energy is higher at the summit than at the base, and lower at sea level
than at the base. Gravity does work on you on your way up, too! It does negative work and not quite as much (in
magnitude), as your muscles do. But it certainly does work. Similarly, your muscles do work on your way down, as
negative work. The numerical values of the potential energies depend on the choice of zero of potential energy, but
the physically meaningful differences of potential energy do not. [Note that since Equation 8.2 is a difference, the
numerical values do not depend on the origin of coordinates.]
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.2
What are the values of the gravitational potential energy of the hiker at the base, summit, and sea level, with respect
to a sea-level zero of potential energy?
Elastic potential energy
In Work, we saw that the work done by a perfectly elastic spring, in one dimension, depends only on the spring
constant and the squares of the displacements from the unstretched position, as given in Equation 7.5. This work
involves only the properties of a Hooke’s law interaction and not the properties of real springs and whatever objects
are attached to them. Therefore, we can define the difference of elastic potential energy for a spring force as the
negative of the work done by the spring force in this equation, before we consider systems that embody this type of
force. Thus,
8.6
where the object travels from point Ato point B . The potential energy function corresponding to this difference is
8.7
344 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
If the spring force is the only force acting, it is simplest to take the zero of potential energy at , when the spring
is at its unstretched length. Then, the constant in Equation 8.7 is zero. (Other choices may be more convenient if
other forces are acting.)
EXAMPLE 8.3
Spring Potential Energy
A system contains a perfectly elastic spring, with an unstretched length of 20 cm and a spring constant of 4 N/cm.
(a) How much elastic potential energy does the spring contribute when its length is 23 cm? (b) How much more
potential energy does it contribute if its length increases to 26 cm?
Strategy
When the spring is at its unstretched length, it contributes nothing to the potential energy of the system, so we can
use Equation 8.7 with the constant equal to zero. The value of x is the length minus the unstretched length. When
the spring is expanded, the spring’s displacement or difference between its relaxed length and stretched length
should be used for the x-value in calculating the potential energy of the spring.
Solution
a. The displacement of the spring is , so the contributed potential energy is
.
b. When the spring’s displacement is , the potential energy is
, which is a 0.54-J increase over the amount in part (a).
Significance
Calculating the elastic potential energy and potential energy differences from Equation 8.7 involves solving for the
potential energies based on the given lengths of the spring. Since Udepends on , the potential energy for a
compression (negative x) is the same as for an extension of equal magnitude.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.3
When the length of the spring in Example 8.3 changes from an initial value of 22.0 cm to a final value, the elastic
potential energy it contributes changes by Find the final length.
Gravitational and elastic potential energy
A simple system embodying both gravitational and elastic types of potential energy is a one-dimensional, vertical
mass-spring system. This consists of a massive particle (or block), hung from one end of a perfectly elastic,
massless spring, the other end of which is fixed, as illustrated in Figure 8.4.
Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 345
FIGURE 8.4 A vertical mass-spring system, with the positive y-axis pointing upward. The mass is initially at an unstretched spring length,
point A. Then it is released, expanding past point B to point C, where it comes to a stop.
First, let's consider the potential energy of the system. We need to define the constant in the potential energy
function of Equation 8.5. Often, the ground is a suitable choice for when the gravitational potential energy is zero;
however, in this case, the highest point or when is a convenient location for zero gravitational potential energy.
Note that this choice is arbitrary, and the problem can be solved correctly even if another choice is picked.
We must also define the elastic potential energy of the system and the corresponding constant, as detailed in
Equation 8.7. This is where the spring is unstretched, or at the position.
If we consider that the total energy of the system is conserved, then the energy at point A equals point C. The block
is placed just on the spring so its initial kinetic energy is zero. By the setup of the problem discussed previously, both
the gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy are equal to zero. Therefore, the initial energy of the
system is zero. When the block arrives at point C, its kinetic energy is zero. However, it now has both gravitational
potential energy and elastic potential energy. Therefore, we can solve for the distance y that the block travels before
coming to a stop:
346 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
FIGURE 8.5 A bungee jumper transforms gravitational potential energy at the start of the jump into elastic potential energy at the bottom of
the jump.
EXAMPLE 8.4
Potential Energy of a Vertical Mass-Spring System
A block weighing is hung from a spring with a spring constant of , as shown in Figure 8.4. (a) What is
the maximum expansion of the spring, as seen at point C? (b) What is the total potential energy at point B, halfway
between A and C? (c) What is the speed of the block at point B?
Strategy
In part (a) we calculate the distance as discussed in the previous text. Then in part (b), we use half of the y value
to calculate the potential energy at point B using equations Equation 8.4 and Equation 8.6. This energy must be
equal to the kinetic energy, Equation 7.6, at point B since the initial energy of the system is zero. By calculating the
kinetic energy at point B, we can now calculate the speed of the block at point B.
Solution
a. Since the total energy of the system is zero at point A as discussed previously, the maximum expansion of the
spring is calculated to be:
b. The position of would therefore be:
is half of the position at or . The total potential energy at point B
c. The mass of the block is the weight divided by gravity.
Access for free at openstax.org
8.1 • Potential Energy of a System 347
The kinetic energy at point B therefore is 0.12 J because the total energy is zero. Therefore, the speed of the
block at point B is equal to
Significance
Even though the potential energy due to gravity is relative to a chosen zero location, the solutions to this problem
would be the same if the zero energy points were chosen at different locations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.4
Suppose the mass in Equation 8.6 is doubled while keeping the all other conditions the same. Would the maximum
expansion of the spring increase, decrease, or remain the same? Would the speed at point B be larger, smaller, or
the same compared to the original mass?
INTERACTIVE
Engage the simulation below to learn about conservation of energy with a skater! Build tracks, ramps and jumps for
the skater and view the kinetic energy, potential energy and friction as he moves. You can also take the skater to
different planets or even space!
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/8-1-potential-energy-
of-a-system)
A sample chart of a variety of energies is shown in Table 8.1 to give you an idea about typical energy values
associated with certain events. Some of these are calculated using kinetic energy, whereas others are calculated by
using quantities found in a form of potential energy that may not have been discussed at this point.
Object/phenomenon Energy in joules
Big Bang
Annual world energy use
Large fusion bomb (9 megaton)
Hiroshima-size fission bomb (10 kiloton)
1 barrel crude oil
1 metric ton TNT
1 gallon of gasoline
Daily adult food intake (recommended)
1000-kg car at 90 km/h
TABLE 8.1 Energy of Various Objects and Phenomena
348 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Object/phenomenon Energy in joules
Tennis ball at 100 km/h
Mosquito
Single electron in a TV tube beam
Energy to break one DNA strand
1 kg hydrogen (fusion to helium)
1 kg uranium (nuclear fission)
TABLE 8.1 Energy of Various Objects and Phenomena
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Characterize a conservative force in several different ways
• Specify mathematical conditions that must be satisfied by a conservative force and its components
• Relate the conservative force between particles of a system to the potential energy of the system
• Calculate the components of a conservative force in various cases
In the interactions we considered in Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy, any transition between kinetic
and potential energy did not change the total energy of the system. This was path independent, meaning that we
can start and stop at any two points in the problem, and the total energy of the system—kinetic plus potential—at
these points are equal to each other. This is characteristic of a conservative force. We dealt with conservative
forces in the preceding section, such as the gravitational force and spring force. When comparing the motion of the
football in Figure 8.2, the total energy of the system never changes, even though the gravitational potential energy of
the football increases, as the ball rises relative to ground and falls back to the initial gravitational potential energy
when the football player catches the ball. Non-conservative forces are dissipative forces such as friction or air
resistance. These forces take energy away from the system as the system progresses, energy that you can’t get
back. These forces are path dependent; therefore it matters where the object starts and stops.
CONSERVATIVE FORCE
The work done by a conservative force is independent of the path; in other words, the work done by a
conservative force is the same for any path connecting two points:
8.8
The work done by a non-conservative force depends on the path taken.
Equivalently, a force is conservative if the work it does around any closed path is zero:
8.9
[In Equation 8.9, we use the notation of a circle in the middle of the integral sign for a line integral over a closed
path, a notation found in most physics and engineering texts.] Equation 8.8 and Equation 8.9 are equivalent because
any closed path is the sum of two paths: the first going from Ato B , and the second going from Bto A . The work
done going along a path from Bto Ais the negative of the work done going along the same path from Ato B , where A
Access for free at openstax.org
8.2 • Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces 349
and Bare any two points on the closed path:
You might ask how we go about proving whether or not a force is conservative, since the definitions involve any and
all paths from Ato B , or any and all closed paths, but to do the integral for the work, you have to choose a particular
path. One answer is that the work done is independent of path if the infinitesimal work is an exact
differential, the way the infinitesimal net work was equal to the exact differential of the kinetic energy,
when we derived the work-energy theorem in Work-Energy Theorem. There are mathematical conditions that you
can use to test whether the infinitesimal work done by a force is an exact differential, and the force is conservative.
These conditions only involve differentiation and are thus relatively easy to apply. In two dimensions, the condition
for to be an exact differential is
8.10
You may recall that the work done by the force in Example 7.4 depended on the path. For that force,
Therefore,
which indicates it is a non-conservative force. Can you see what you could change to make it a conservative force?
FIGURE 8.6 A grinding wheel applies a non-conservative force, because the work done depends on how many rotations the wheel makes,
so it is path-dependent. (credit: modification of work by Grantez Stephens, U.S. Navy)
EXAMPLE 8.5
Conservative or Not?
Which of the following two-dimensional forces are conservative and which are not? Assume a and bare constants
with appropriate units:
(a) (b) (c)
350 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Strategy
Apply the condition stated in Equation 8.10, namely, using the derivatives of the components of each force
indicated. If the derivative of the y-component of the force with respect to x is equal to the derivative of the
x-component of the force with respect to y, the force is a conservative force, which means the path taken for
potential energy or work calculations always yields the same results.
Solution
a. and , so this force is non-conservative.
b. and so this force is conservative.
c. again conservative.
Significance
The conditions in Equation 8.10 are derivatives as functions of a single variable; in three dimensions, similar
conditions exist that involve more derivatives.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.5
A two-dimensional, conservative force is zero on the x- and y-axes, and satisfies the condition
. What is the magnitude of the force at the point
Before leaving this section, we note that non-conservative forces do not have potential energy associated with them
because the energy is lost to the system and can’t be turned into useful work later. So there is always a conservative
force associated with every potential energy. We have seen that potential energy is defined in relation to the work
done by conservative forces. That relation, Equation 8.1, involved an integral for the work; starting with the force
and displacement, you integrated to get the work and the change in potential energy. However, integration is the
inverse operation of differentiation; you could equally well have started with the potential energy and taken its
derivative, with respect to displacement, to get the force. The infinitesimal increment of potential energy is the dot
product of the force and the infinitesimal displacement,
Here, we chose to represent the displacement in an arbitrary direction by so as not to be restricted to any
particular coordinate direction. We also expressed the dot product in terms of the magnitude of the infinitesimal
displacement and the component of the force in its direction. Both these quantities are scalars, so you can divide by
dlto get
8.11
This equation gives the relation between force and the potential energy associated with it. In words, the component
of a conservative force, in a particular direction, equals the negative of the derivative of the corresponding potential
energy, with respect to a displacement in that direction. For one-dimensional motion, say along the x-axis, Equation
8.11 give the entire vector force,
In two dimensions,
From this equation, you can see why Equation 8.11 is the condition for the work to be an exact differential, in terms
Access for free at openstax.org
8.3 • Conservation of Energy 351
of the derivatives of the components of the force. In general, a partial derivative notation is used. If a function has
many variables in it, the derivative is taken only of the variable the partial derivative specifies. The other variables
are held constant. In three dimensions, you add another term for the z-component, and the result is that the force is
the negative of the gradient of the potential energy. However, we won’t be looking at three-dimensional examples
just yet.
EXAMPLE 8.6
Force due to a Quartic Potential Energy
The potential energy for a particle undergoing one-dimensional motion along the x-axis is
where Its total energy at and it is not subject to any non-conservative forces. Find (a) the
positions where its kinetic energy is zero and (b) the forces at those positions.
Strategy
(a) We can find the positions where so the potential energy equals the total energy of the given system. (b)
Using Equation 8.11, we can find the force evaluated at the positions found from the previous part, since the
mechanical energy is conserved.
Solution
a. The total energy of the system of 2 J equals the quartic elastic energy as given in the problem,
Solving for results in
b. From Equation 8.11,
Thus, evaluating the force at , we get
At both positions, the magnitude of the forces is 8 N and the directions are toward the origin, since this is the
potential energy for a restoring force.
Significance
Finding the force from the potential energy is mathematically easier than finding the potential energy from the force,
because differentiating a function is generally easier than integrating one.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.6
Find the forces on the particle in Example 8.6 when its kinetic energy is 1.0 J at
8.3 Conservation of Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Formulate the principle of conservation of mechanical energy, with or without the presence of non-
conservative forces
• Use the conservation of mechanical energy to calculate various properties of simple systems
In this section, we elaborate and extend the result we derived in Potential Energy of a System, where we re-wrote
the work-energy theorem in terms of the change in the kinetic and potential energies of a particle. This will lead us
to a discussion of the important principle of the conservation of mechanical energy. As you continue to examine
352 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
other topics in physics, in later chapters of this book, you will see how this conservation law is generalized to
encompass other types of energy and energy transfers. The last section of this chapter provides a preview.
The terms ‘conserved quantity’ and ‘conservation law’ have specific, scientific meanings in physics, which are
different from the everyday meanings associated with the use of these words. (The same comment is also true
about the scientific and everyday uses of the word ‘work.’) In everyday usage, you could conserve water by not using
it, or by using less of it, or by re-using it. Water is composed of molecules consisting of two atoms of hydrogen and
one of oxygen. Bring these atoms together to form a molecule and you create water; dissociate the atoms in such a
molecule and you destroy water. However, in scientific usage, a conserved quantity for a system stays constant,
changes by a definite amount that is transferred to other systems, and/or is converted into other forms of that
quantity. A conserved quantity, in the scientific sense, can be transformed, but not strictly created or destroyed.
Thus, there is no physical law of conservation of water.
Systems with a Single Particle or Object
We first consider a system with a single particle or object. Returning to our development of Equation 8.2, recall that
we first separated all the forces acting on a particle into conservative and non-conservative types, and wrote the
work done by each type of force as a separate term in the work-energy theorem. We then replaced the work done by
the conservative forces by the change in the potential energy of the particle, combining it with the change in the
particle’s kinetic energy to get Equation 8.2. Now, we write this equation without the middle step and define the sum
of the kinetic and potential energies, to be the mechanical energy of the particle.
CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
The mechanical energy Eof a particle stays constant unless forces outside the system or non-conservative
forces do work on it, in which case, the change in the mechanical energy is equal to the work done by the non-
conservative forces:
8.12
This statement expresses the concept of energy conservation for a classical particle as long as there is no non-
conservative work. Recall that a classical particle is just a point mass, is nonrelativistic, and obeys Newton’s laws of
motion. In Relativity (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction), we will see
that conservation of energy still applies to a non-classical particle, but for that to happen, we have to make a slight
adjustment to the definition of energy.
It is sometimes convenient to separate the case where the work done by non-conservative forces is zero, either
because no such forces are assumed present, or, like the normal force, they do zero work when the motion is
parallel to the surface. Then
8.13
In this case, the conservation of mechanical energy can be expressed as follows: The mechanical energy of a
particle does not change if all the non-conservative forces that may act on it do no work. Understanding the concept
of energy conservation is the important thing, not the particular equation you use to express it.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Conservation of Energy
1. Identify the body or bodies to be studied (the system). Often, in applications of the principle of mechanical
energy conservation, we study more than one body at the same time.
2. 3. Identify all forces acting on the body or bodies.
Determine whether each force that does work is conservative. If a non-conservative force (e.g., friction) is
doing work, then mechanical energy is not conserved. The system must then be analyzed with non-
Access for free at openstax.org
8.3 • Conservation of Energy 353
4. 5. conservative work, Equation 8.12.
For every conservative force that does work, choose a reference point and determine the potential energy
function for the force. The reference points for the various potential energies do not have to be at the same
location.
If no non-conservative work is done, apply the principle of mechanical energy conservation by setting the sum
of the kinetic energies and potential energies equal at every point of interest.
EXAMPLE 8.7
Simple Pendulum
A particle of mass m is hung from the ceiling by a massless string of length 1.0 m, as shown in Figure 8.7. The
particle is released from rest, when the angle between the string and the downward vertical direction is its speed when it reaches the lowest point of its arc?
What is
FIGURE 8.7 A particle hung from a string constitutes a simple pendulum. It is shown when released from rest, along with some distances
used in analyzing the motion.
Strategy
Using our problem-solving strategy, the first step is to define that we are interested in the particle-Earth system.
Second, only the gravitational force is acting on the particle, which is conservative (step 3). We neglect air resistance
in the problem, and no work is done by the string tension, which is perpendicular to the arc of the motion. Therefore,
the mechanical energy of the system is conserved, as represented by Equation 8.13, . Because the
particle starts from rest, the increase in the kinetic energy is just the kinetic energy at the lowest point. This increase
in kinetic energy equals the decrease in the gravitational potential energy, which we can calculate from the
geometry. In step 4, we choose a reference point for zero gravitational potential energy to be at the lowest vertical
point the particle achieves, which is mid-swing. Lastly, in step 5, we set the sum of energies at the highest point
(initial) of the swing to the lowest point (final) of the swing to ultimately solve for the final speed.
Solution
We are neglecting non-conservative forces, so we write the energy conservation formula relating the particle at the
highest point (initial) and the lowest point in the swing (final) as
Since the particle is released from rest, the initial kinetic energy is zero. At the lowest point, we define the
gravitational potential energy to be zero. Therefore our conservation of energy formula reduces to
The vertical height of the particle is not given directly in the problem. This can be solved for by using trigonometry
and two givens: the length of the pendulum and the angle through which the particle is vertically pulled up. Looking
at the diagram, the vertical dashed line is the length of the pendulum string. The vertical height is labeled h . The
354 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
other partial length of the vertical string can be calculated with trigonometry. That piece is solved for by
Therefore, by looking at the two parts of the string, we can solve for the height h ,
We substitute this height into the previous expression solved for speed to calculate our result:
Significance
We found the speed directly from the conservation of mechanical energy, without having to solve the differential
equation for the motion of a pendulum (see Oscillations). We can approach this problem in terms of bar graphs of
total energy. Initially, the particle has all potential energy, being at the highest point, and no kinetic energy. When
the particle crosses the lowest point at the bottom of the swing, the energy moves from the potential energy column
to the kinetic energy column. Therefore, we can imagine a progression of this transfer as the particle moves
between its highest point, lowest point of the swing, and back to the highest point (Figure 8.8). As the particle
travels from the lowest point in the swing to the highest point on the far right hand side of the diagram, the energy
bars go in reverse order from (c) to (b) to (a).
FIGURE 8.8 Bar graphs representing the total energy (E ), potential energy (U ), and kinetic energy (K ) of the particle in different positions.
(a) The total energy of the system equals the potential energy and the kinetic energy is zero, which is found at the highest point the particle
reaches. (b) The particle is midway between the highest and lowest point, so the kinetic energy plus potential energy bar graphs equal the
total energy. (c) The particle is at the lowest point of the swing, so the kinetic energy bar graph is the highest and equal to the total energy
of the system.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.7
How high above the bottom of its arc is the particle in the simple pendulum above, when its speed is
EXAMPLE 8.8
Air Resistance on a Falling Object
A helicopter is hovering at an altitude of ground (Figure 8.9). The mass of the panel is mechanical energy was dissipated by air resistance during the panel’s descent?
when a panel from its underside breaks loose and plummets to the
and it hits the ground with a speed of . How much
Access for free at openstax.org
8.3 • Conservation of Energy 355
FIGURE 8.9 A helicopter loses a panel that falls until it reaches terminal velocity of 45 m/s. How much did air resistance contribute to the
dissipation of energy in this problem?
Strategy
Step 1: Here only one body is being investigated.
Step 2: Gravitational force is acting on the panel, as well as air resistance, which is stated in the problem.
Step 3: Gravitational force is conservative; however, the non-conservative force of air resistance does negative work
on the falling panel, so we can use the conservation of mechanical energy, in the form expressed by Equation 8.12,
to find the energy dissipated. This energy is the magnitude of the work:
Step 4: The initial kinetic energy, at level out of convenience.
is zero. We set the gravitational potential energy to zero at ground
Step 5: The non-conservative work is set equal to the energies to solve for the work dissipated by air resistance.
Solution
The mechanical energy dissipated by air resistance is the algebraic sum of the gain in the kinetic energy and loss in
potential energy. Therefore the calculation of this energy is
Significance
Most of the initial mechanical energy of the panel , 147 kJ, was lost to air resistance. Notice that we were able
to calculate the energy dissipated without knowing what the force of air resistance was, only that it was dissipative.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.8
You probably recall that, neglecting air resistance, if you throw a projectile straight up, the time it takes to reach its
maximum height equals the time it takes to fall from the maximum height back to the starting height. Suppose you
356 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
cannot neglect air resistance, as in Example 8.8. Is the time the projectile takes to go up (a) greater than, (b) less
than, or (c) equal to the time it takes to come back down? Explain.
In these examples, we were able to use conservation of energy to calculate the speed of a particle just at particular
points in its motion. But the method of analyzing particle motion, starting from energy conservation, is more
powerful than that. More advanced treatments of the theory of mechanics allow you to calculate the full time
dependence of a particle’s motion, for a given potential energy. In fact, it is often the case that a better model for
particle motion is provided by the form of its kinetic and potential energies, rather than an equation for force acting
on it. (This is especially true for the quantum mechanical description of particles like electrons or atoms.)
We can illustrate some of the simplest features of this energy-based approach by considering a particle in one-
dimensional motion, with potential energy U (x) and no non-conservative interactions present. Equation 8.12 and the
definition of velocity require
Separate the variables x and tand integrate, from an initial time to an arbitrary time, to get
8.14
If you can do the integral in Equation 8.14, then you can solve for x as a function of t .
EXAMPLE 8.9
in Equation 8.14 to find the position x of a particle as a
Constant Acceleration
Use the potential energy function of time t .
for Strategy
Since we know how the potential energy changes as a function of x, we can substitute for in Equation 8.14,
integrate, and then solve for x. This results in an expression of x as a function of time with constants of energy E ,
mass m, and the initial position
Solution
Following the first two suggested steps in the above strategy,
Solving for the position, we obtain .
Significance
The position as a function of time, for this potential, represents one-dimensional motion with constant acceleration,
starting at rest from position This is not so surprising, since this is a potential energy for a
constant force, and
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.9
What potential energy can you substitute in Equation 8.13 that will result in motion with constant velocity of 2
Access for free at openstax.org
8.4 • Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability 357
m/s for a particle of mass 1 kg and mechanical energy 1 J?
We will look at another more physically appropriate example of the use of Equation 8.13 after we have explored
some further implications that can be drawn from the functional form of a particle’s potential energy.
Systems with Several Particles or Objects
Systems generally consist of more than one particle or object. However, the conservation of mechanical energy, in
one of the forms in Equation 8.12 or Equation 8.13, is a fundamental law of physics and applies to any system. You
just have to include the kinetic and potential energies of all the particles, and the work done by all the non-
conservative forces acting on them. Until you learn more about the dynamics of systems composed of many
particles, in Linear Momentum and Collisions, Fixed-Axis Rotation, and Angular Momentum, it is better to postpone
discussing the application of energy conservation to then.
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Create and interpret graphs of potential energy
• Explain the connection between stability and potential energy
Often, you can get a good deal of useful information about the dynamical behavior of a mechanical system just by
interpreting a graph of its potential energy as a function of position, called a potential energy diagram. This is most
easily accomplished for a one-dimensional system, whose potential energy can be plotted in one two-dimensional
graph—for example, U (x) versus x—on a piece of paper or a computer program. For systems whose motion is in more
than one dimension, the motion needs to be studied in three-dimensional space. We will simplify our procedure for
one-dimensional motion only.
First, let’s look at an object, freely falling vertically, near the surface of Earth, in the absence of air resistance. The
mechanical energy of the object is conserved, and the potential energy, with respect to zero at ground
level, is which is a straight line through the origin with slope . In the graph shown in Figure 8.10,
the x-axis is the height above the ground y and the y-axis is the object’s energy.
FIGURE 8.10 The potential energy graph for an object in vertical free fall, with various quantities indicated.
The line at energy Erepresents the constant mechanical energy of the object, whereas the kinetic and potential
energies, and are indicated at a particular height You can see how the total energy is divided between
kinetic and potential energy as the object’s height changes. Since kinetic energy can never be negative, there is a
maximum potential energy and a maximum height, which an object with the given total energy cannot exceed:
If we use the gravitational potential energy reference point of zero at energy Uas mg y. Solving for y results in
we can rewrite the gravitational potential
358 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
We note in this expression that the quantity of the total energy divided by the weight (mg) is located at the
maximum height of the particle, or At the maximum height, the kinetic energy and the speed are zero, so if the
object were initially traveling upward, its velocity would go through zero there, and would be a turning point in
the motion. At ground level, , the potential energy is zero, and the kinetic energy and the speed are
maximum:
The maximum speed gives the initial velocity necessary to reach represents the final velocity, after falling from energy diagram we have shown.
the maximum height, and
You can read all this information, and more, from the potential
Consider a mass-spring system on a frictionless, stationary, horizontal surface, so that gravity and the normal
contact force do no work and can be ignored (Figure 8.11). This is like a one-dimensional system, whose mechanical
energy Eis a constant and whose potential energy, with respect to zero energy at zero displacement from the
spring’s unstretched length, .
FIGURE 8.11 (a) A glider between springs on an air track is an example of a horizontal mass-spring system. (b) The potential energy
diagram for this system, with various quantities indicated.
You can read off the same type of information from the potential energy diagram in this case, as in the case for the
body in vertical free fall, but since the spring potential energy describes a variable force, you can learn more from
this graph. As for the object in vertical free fall, you can deduce the physically allowable range of motion and the
maximum values of distance and speed, from the limits on the kinetic energy, Therefore, and
at a turning point, of which there are two for the elastic spring potential energy,
The glider’s motion is confined to the region between the turning points, This is true for any
(positive) value of Ebecause the potential energy is unbounded with respect to x. For this reason, as well as the
shape of the potential energy curve, U (x) is called an infinite potential well. At the bottom of the potential well,
and the kinetic energy is a maximum,
However, from the slope of this potential energy curve, you can also deduce information about the force on the
glider and its acceleration. We saw earlier that the negative of the slope of the potential energy is the spring force,
which in this case is also the net force, and thus is proportional to the acceleration. When , the slope, the
force, and the acceleration are all zero, so this is an equilibrium point. The negative of the slope, on either side of
the equilibrium point, gives a force pointing back to the equilibrium point, so the equilibrium is termed
stable and the force is called a restoring force. This implies that U (x) has a relative minimum there. If the force on
Access for free at openstax.org
8.4 • Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability 359
either side of an equilibrium point has a direction that is the same as the direction of position change, pointing away
from the equilibrium point, the equilibrium is termed unstable, and this implies that U (x) has a relative maximum
there.
EXAMPLE 8.10
Quartic and Quadratic Potential Energy Diagram
The potential energy for a particle undergoing one-dimensional motion along the x-axis is
where Uis in joules and x is in meters. The particle is not subject to any non-conservative forces and its mechanical
energy is constant at . (a) Is the motion of the particle confined to any regions on the x-axis, and if so,
what are they? (b) Are there any equilibrium points, and if so, where are they and are they stable or unstable?
Strategy
First, we need to graph the potential energy as a function of x. The function is zero at the origin, becomes negative
as x increases in the positive or negative directions ( is larger than for ), and then becomes positive at
sufficiently large . Your graph should look like a double potential well, with the zeros determined by solving the
equation , and the extremes determined by examining the first and second derivatives of U (x), as shown in
Figure 8.12.
FIGURE 8.12 The potential energy graph for a one-dimensional, quartic and quadratic potential energy, with various quantities indicated.
You can find the values of (a) the allowed regions along the x-axis, for the given value of the mechanical energy, from
the condition that the kinetic energy can’t be negative, and (b) the equilibrium points and their stability from the
properties of the force (stable for a relative minimum and unstable for a relative maximum of potential energy).
You can just eyeball the graph to reach qualitative answers to the questions in this example. That, after all, is the
value of potential energy diagrams. You can see that there are two allowed regions for the motion three equilibrium points (slope of which the central one is unstable and
and the other
two are stable
Solution
a. To find the allowed regions for x, we use the condition
360 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
If we complete the square in , this condition simplifies to which we can solve to obtain
b. This represents two allowed regions, and where and
(in meters).
To find the equilibrium points, we solve the equation
and find and , where (meters). The second derivative
is negative at derivative is positive at , so that position is a relative maximum and the equilibrium there is unstable. The second
, so these positions are relative minima and represent stable equilibria.
Significance
The particle in this example can oscillate in the allowed region about either of the two stable equilibrium points we
found, but it does not have enough energy to escape from whichever potential well it happens to initially be in. The
conservation of mechanical energy and the relations between kinetic energy and speed, and potential energy and
force, enable you to deduce much information about the qualitative behavior of the motion of a particle, as well as
some quantitative information, from a graph of its potential energy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.10
Repeat Example 8.10 when the particle’s mechanical energy is
Before ending this section, let’s practice applying the method based on the potential energy of a particle to find its
position as a function of time, for the one-dimensional, mass-spring system considered earlier in this section.
EXAMPLE 8.11
and a potential energy ,
Sinusoidal Oscillations
Find x(t ) for a particle moving with a constant mechanical energy when the particle starts from rest at time .
Strategy
We follow the same steps as we did in Example 8.9. Substitute the potential energy Uinto Equation 8.14 and factor
out the constants, like m or k . Integrate the function and solve the resulting expression for position, which is now a
function of time.
Solution
Substitute the potential energy in Equation 8.14 and integrate using an integral solver found on a web search:
From the initial conditions at from which you can see that the initial kinetic energy is zero and the initial potential energy is
Now you can solve for x:
and Access for free at openstax.org
8.5 • Sources of Energy 361
Significance
A few paragraphs earlier, we referred to this mass-spring system as an example of a harmonic oscillator. Here, we
anticipate that a harmonic oscillator executes sinusoidal oscillations with a maximum displacement of
(called the amplitude) and a rate of oscillation of (called the frequency). Further discussions about
oscillations can be found in Oscillations.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 8.11
Find for the mass-spring system in Example 8.11 if the particle starts from particle’s initial velocity?
at What is the
8.5 Sources of Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe energy transformations and conversions in general terms
• Explain what it means for an energy source to be renewable or nonrenewable
In this chapter, we have studied energy. We learned that energy can take different forms and can be transferred
from one form to another. You will find that energy is discussed in many everyday, as well as scientific, contexts,
because it is involved in all physical processes. It will also become apparent that many situations are best
understood, or most easily conceptualized, by considering energy. So far, no experimental results have contradicted
the conservation of energy. In fact, whenever measurements have appeared to conflict with energy conservation,
new forms of energy have been discovered or recognized in accordance with this principle.
What are some other forms of energy? Many of these are covered in later chapters (also see Figure 8.13), but let’s
detail a few here:
• Atoms and molecules inside all objects are in random motion. The internal kinetic energy from these random
motions is called thermal ener g y, because it is related to the temperature of the object. In this case, the
energy is known as heat ener g y.
• Electrical ener g y is a common form that is converted to many other forms and does work in a wide range of
practical situations.
• Fuels, such as gasoline and food, have chemical ener g y, which is potential energy arising from their molecular
structure. Chemical energy can be converted into thermal energy by reactions like oxidation. Chemical
reactions can also produce electrical energy, such as in batteries. Electrical energy can, in turn, produce
thermal energy and light, such as in an electric heater or a light bulb.
• Light is just one kind of electromagnetic radiation, or radiant ener g y, which also includes radio, infrared,
ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays. All bodies with thermal energy can radiate energy in electromagnetic
waves.
• Nuclear ener g y comes from reactions and processes that convert measurable amounts of mass into energy.
Nuclear energy is transformed into radiant energy in the Sun, into thermal energy in the boilers of nuclear
power plants, and then into electrical energy in the generators of power plants. These and all other forms of
energy can be transformed into one another and, to a certain degree, can be converted into mechanical work.
362 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
FIGURE 8.13 Energy that we use in society takes many forms, which be converted from one into another depending on the process
involved. We will study many of these forms of energy in later chapters in this text. (credit “sun”: modification of work by EIT - SOHO
Consortium, ESA, NASA credit “solar panels”: “modification of work by “kjkolb”/Wikimedia Commons; credit “gas burner”: modification of
work by Steven Depolo)
The transformation of energy from one form into another happens all the time. The chemical energy in food is
converted into thermal energy through metabolism; light energy is converted into chemical energy through
photosynthesis. Another example of energy conversion occurs in a solar cell. Sunlight impinging on a solar cell
produces electricity, which can be used to run electric motors or heat water. In an example encompassing many
steps, the chemical energy contained in coal is converted into thermal energy as it burns in a furnace, to transform
water into steam, in a boiler. Some of the thermal energy in the steam is then converted into mechanical energy as it
expands and spins a turbine, which is connected to a generator to produce electrical energy. In these examples, not
all of the initial energy is converted into the forms mentioned, because some energy is always transferred to the
environment.
Energy is an important element at all levels of society. We live in a very interdependent world, and access to
adequate and reliable energy resources is crucial for economic growth and for maintaining the quality of our lives.
The principal energy resources used in the world are shown in Figure 8.14. The figure distinguishes between two
major types of energy sources: renewable and non-renewable, and further divides each type into a few more
specific kinds. Renewable sources are energy sources that are replenished through naturally occurring, ongoing
processes, on a time scale that is much shorter than the anticipated lifetime of the civilization using the source.
Non-renewable sources are depleted once some of the energy they contain is extracted and converted into other
kinds of energy. The natural processes by which non-renewable sources are formed typically take place over
geological time scales.
Access for free at openstax.org
8.5 • Sources of Energy 363
FIGURE 8.14 World energy consumption by source; the percentage of renewables is increasing, accounting for 19% in 2012.
Our most important non-renewable energy sources are fossil fuels, such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas. These
account for about 81% of the world’s energy consumption, as shown in the figure. Burning fossil fuels creates
chemical reactions that transform potential energy, in the molecular structures of the reactants, into thermal energy
and products. This thermal energy can be used to heat buildings or to operate steam-driven machinery. Internal
combustion and jet engines convert some of the energy of rapidly expanding gases, released from burning gasoline,
into mechanical work. Electrical power generation is mostly derived from transferring energy in expanding steam,
via turbines, into mechanical work, which rotates coils of wire in magnetic fields to generate electricity. Nuclear
energy is the other non-renewable source shown in Figure 8.14 and supplies about 3% of the world’s consumption.
Nuclear reactions release energy by transforming potential energy, in the structure of nuclei, into thermal energy,
analogous to energy release in chemical reactions. The thermal energy obtained from nuclear reactions can be
transferred and converted into other forms in the same ways that energy from fossil fuels are used.
An unfortunate byproduct of relying on energy produced from the combustion of fossil fuels is the release of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere and its contribution to global warming. Nuclear energy poses environmental problems
as well, including the safety and disposal of nuclear waste. Besides these important consequences, reserves of non-
renewable sources of energy are limited and, given the rapidly growing rate of world energy consumption, may not
last for more than a few hundred years. Considerable effort is going on to develop and expand the use of renewable
sources of energy, involving a significant percentage of the world’s physicists and engineers.
Four of the renewable energy sources listed in Figure 8.14—those using material from plants as fuel (biomass heat,
ethanol, biodiesel, and biomass electricity)—involve the same types of energy transformations and conversions as
just discussed for fossil and nuclear fuels. The other major types of renewable energy sources are hydropower, wind
power, geothermal power, and solar power.
Hydropower is produced by converting the gravitational potential energy of falling or flowing water into kinetic
energy and then into work to run electric generators or machinery. Converting the mechanical energy in ocean
surface waves and tides is in development. Wind power also converts kinetic energy into work, which can be used
directly to generate electricity, operate mills, and propel sailboats.
The interior of Earth has a great deal of thermal energy, part of which is left over from its original formation
(gravitational potential energy converted into thermal energy) and part of which is released from radioactive
minerals (a form of natural nuclear energy). It will take a very long time for this geothermal energy to escape into
space, so people generally regard it as a renewable source, when actually, it’s just inexhaustible on human time
scales.
The source of solar power is energy carried by the electromagnetic waves radiated by the Sun. Most of this energy is
carried by visible light and infrared (heat) radiation. When suitable materials absorb electromagnetic waves, radiant
energy is converted into thermal energy, which can be used to heat water, or when concentrated, to make steam and
364 8 • Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
generate electricity (Figure 8.15). However, in another important physical process, known as the photoelectric
effect, energetic radiation impinging on certain materials is directly converted into electricity. Materials that do this
are called photovoltaics (PV in Figure 8.14). Some solar power systems use lenses or mirrors to concentrate the
Sun’s rays, before converting their energy through photovoltaics, and these are qualified as CSP in Figure 8.14.
FIGURE 8.15 Solar cell arrays found in a sunny area converting the solar energy into stored electrical energy. (credit: modification of work
by Sarah Swenty, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
As we finish this chapter on energy and work, it is relevant to draw some distinctions between two sometimes
misunderstood terms in the area of energy use. As we mentioned earlier, the “law of conservation of energy” is a
very useful principle in analyzing physical processes. It cannot be proven from basic principles but is a very good
bookkeeping device, and no exceptions have ever been found. It states that the total amount of energy in an isolated
system always remains constant. Related to this principle, but remarkably different from it, is the important
philosophy of energy conservation. This concept has to do with seeking to decrease the amount of energy used by
an individual or group through reducing activities (e.g., turning down thermostats, driving fewer kilometers) and/or
increasing conversion efficiencies in the performance of a particular task, such as developing and using more
efficient room heaters, cars that have greater miles-per-gallon ratings, energy-efficient compact fluorescent lights,
etc.
Since energy in an isolated system is not destroyed, created, or generated, you might wonder why we need to be
concerned about our energy resources, since energy is a conserved quantity. The problem is that the final result of
most energy transformations is waste heat, that is, work that has been “degraded” in the energy transformation. We
will discuss this idea in more detail in the chapters on thermodynamics.
Access for free at openstax.org
8 • Chapter Review 365
Chapter Review
Key Terms
conservative force force that does work independent
of path
conserved quantity one that cannot be created or
destroyed, but may be transformed between
different forms of itself
energy conservation total energy of an isolated
system is constant
equilibrium point position where the assumed
conservative, net force on a particle, given by the
slope of its potential energy curve, is zero
exact differential is the total differential of a function
and requires the use of partial derivatives if the
function involves more than one dimension
mechanical energy sum of the kinetic and potential
energies
Key Equations
Difference of potential energy
Potential energy with respect to zero of
potential energy at
Gravitational potential energy near Earth’s surface
Potential energy for an ideal spring
Work done by conservative force over a closed path
Condition for conservative force in two dimensions
Conservative force is the negative derivative of potential energy
Conservation of energy with no
non-conservative forces
Summary
8.1 Potential Energy of a System
• For a single-particle system, the difference of
potential energy is the opposite of the work done
by the forces acting on the particle as it moves
from one position to another.
• Since only differences of potential energy are
physically meaningful, the zero of the potential
energy function can be chosen at a convenient
location.
• The potential energies for Earth’s constant
gravity, near its surface, and for a Hooke’s law
force are linear and quadratic functions of
position, respectively.
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
non-conservative force force that does work that
depends on path
non-renewable energy source that is not renewable,
but is depleted by human consumption
potential energy function of position, energy
possessed by an object relative to the system
considered
potential energy diagram graph of a particle’s
potential energy as a function of position
potential energy difference negative of the work
done acting between two points in space
renewable energy source that is replenished by
natural processes, over human time scales
turning point position where the velocity of a
particle, in one-dimensional motion, changes sign
• A conservative force is one for which the work
done is independent of path. Equivalently, a force
is conservative if the work done over any closed
path is zero.
• A non-conservative force is one for which the
work done depends on the path.
• For a conservative force, the infinitesimal work is
an exact differential. This implies conditions on
the derivatives of the force’s components.
• The component of a conservative force, in a
particular direction, equals the negative of the
derivative of the potential energy for that force,
with respect to a displacement in that direction.
8.3 Conservation of Energy
• A conserved quantity is a physical property that
stays constant regardless of the path taken.
• A form of the work-energy theorem says that the
change in the mechanical energy of a particle
equals the work done on it by non-conservative
366 8 • Chapter Review
forces.
• If non-conservative forces do no work and there
are no external forces, the mechanical energy of
a particle stays constant. This is a statement of
the conservation of mechanical energy and there
is no change in the total mechanical energy.
• For one-dimensional particle motion, in which
the mechanical energy is constant and the
potential energy is known, the particle’s position,
as a function of time, can be found by evaluating
an integral that is derived from the conservation
of mechanical energy.
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
• Interpreting a one-dimensional potential energy
diagram allows you to obtain qualitative, and
some quantitative, information about the motion
of a particle.
• At a turning point, the potential energy equals
the mechanical energy and the kinetic energy is
zero, indicating that the direction of the velocity
reverses there.
Conceptual Questions
8.1 Potential Energy of a System
1. The kinetic energy of a system must always be
positive or zero. Explain whether this is true for
the potential energy of a system.
2. The force exerted by a diving board is
conservative, provided the internal friction is
negligible. Assuming friction is negligible,
describe changes in the potential energy of a
diving board as a swimmer drives from it,
starting just before the swimmer steps on the
board until just after their feet leave it.
Describe the gravitational potential energy
transfers and transformations for a javelin,
starting from the point at which an athlete picks
up the javelin and ending when the javelin is
stuck into the ground after being thrown.
A couple of soccer balls of equal mass are
kicked off the ground at the same speed but at
different angles. Soccer ball A is kicked off at an
angle slightly above the horizontal, whereas ball
B is kicked slightly below the vertical. How do
each of the following compare for ball A and ball
B? (a) The initial kinetic energy and (b) the
change in gravitational potential energy from the
ground to the highest point? If the energy in part
(a) differs from part (b), explain why there is a
difference between the two energies.
3. 4. Access for free at openstax.org
• The negative of the slope of the potential energy
curve, for a particle, equals the one-dimensional
component of the conservative force on the
particle. At an equilibrium point, the slope is zero
and is a stable (unstable) equilibrium for a
potential energy minimum (maximum).
8.5 Sources of Energy
• Energy can be transferred from one system to
another and transformed or converted from one
type into another. Some of the basic types of
energy are kinetic, potential, thermal, and
electromagnetic.
• Renewable energy sources are those that are
replenished by ongoing natural processes, over
human time scales. Examples are wind, water,
geothermal, and solar power.
• Non-renewable energy sources are those that are
depleted by consumption, over human time
scales. Examples are fossil fuel and nuclear
power.
5. 6. What is the dominant factor that affects the
speed of an object that started from rest down a
frictionless incline if the only work done on the
object is from gravitational forces?
Two people observe a leaf falling from a tree.
One person is standing on a ladder and the other
is on the ground. If each person were to
compare the energy of the leaf observed, would
each person find the following to be the same or
different for the leaf, from the point where it falls
off the tree to when it hits the ground: (a) the
kinetic energy of the leaf; (b) the change in
gravitational potential energy; (c) the final
gravitational potential energy?
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
7. 8. 9. What is the physical meaning of a non-
conservative force?
A bottle rocket is shot straight up in the air with
a speed . If the air resistance is ignored,
the bottle would go up to a height of
approximately . However, the rocket goes
up to only before returning to the ground.
What happened? Explain, giving only a
qualitative response.
An external force acts on a particle during a trip
from one point to another and back to that same
point. This particle is only effected by
conservative forces. Does this particle’s kinetic
energy and potential energy change as a result
of this trip?
8.3 Conservation of Energy
10. When a body slides down an inclined plane,
does the work of friction depend on the body’s
initial speed? Answer the same question for a
body sliding down a curved surface.
Consider the following scenario. A car for which
friction is notnegligible accelerates from rest down
a hill, running out of gasoline after a short distance
(see below). The driver lets the car coast farther
down the hill, then up and over a small crest. He
then coasts down that hill into a gas station, where
he brakes to a stop and fills the tank with gasoline.
Identify the forms of energy the car has, and how
they are changed and transferred in this series of
events.
11. 12. A dropped ball bounces to one-half its original
height. Discuss the energy transformations that
take place.
13.
“ constant is a special case of the
work-energy theorem.” Discuss this statement.
Problems
8.1 Potential Energy of a System
19. Using values from Table 8.1, how many DNA
molecules could be broken by the energy carried
by a single electron in the beam of an old-
fashioned TV tube? (These electrons were not
dangerous in themselves, but they did create
dangerous X-rays. Later-model tube TVs had
shielding that absorbed X-rays before they
escaped and exposed viewers.)
If the energy in fusion bombs were used to
supply the energy needs of the world, how many
of the 9-megaton variety would be needed for a
year’s supply of energy (using data from [link])?
A camera weighing 10 N falls from a small drone
20. 21. 8 • Chapter Review 367
14. In a common physics demonstration, a bowling ball
is suspended from the ceiling by a rope.
The professor pulls the ball away from its
equilibrium position and holds it adjacent to his
nose, as shown below. He releases the ball so that it
swings directly away from him. Does he get struck
by the ball on its return swing? What is he trying to
show in this demonstration?
15. 16. 17. 18. A child jumps up and down on a bed, reaching a
higher height after each bounce. Explain how the
child can increase his maximum gravitational
potential energy with each bounce.
Can a non-conservative force increase the
mechanical energy of the system?
Neglecting air resistance, how much would I
have to raise the vertical height if I wanted to
double the impact speed of a falling object?
A box is dropped onto a spring at its equilibrium
position. The spring compresses with the box
attached and comes to rest. Since the spring is
in the vertical position, does the change in the
gravitational potential energy of the box while
the spring is compressing need to be considered
in this problem?
hovering overhead and enters free fall.
What is the gravitational potential energy change
of the camera from the drone to the ground if
you take a reference point of (a) the ground
being zero gravitational potential energy? (b)
The drone being zero gravitational potential
energy? What is the gravitational potential
energy of the camera (c) before it falls from the
drone and (d) after the camera lands on the
ground if the reference point of zero gravitational
potential energy is taken to be a second person
looking out of a building from the ground?
22. Someone drops a cruise ship, person on a dock pebble off of a docked
above the water level. A
above the water level
368 8 • Chapter Review
23. holds out a net to catch the pebble. (a) How
much work is done on the pebble by gravity
during the drop? (b) What is the change in the
gravitational potential energy during the drop? If
the gravitational potential energy is zero at the
water line, what is the gravitational potential
energy (c) when the pebble is dropped? (d)
When it reaches the net? What if the
gravitational potential energy was Joules at
water level? (e) Find the answers to the same
questions in (c) and (d).
A cat’s crinkle ball toy of mass is thrown
straight up with an initial speed of .
Assume in this problem that air drag is
negligible. (a) What is the kinetic energy of the
ball as it leaves the hand? (b) How much work is
done by the gravitational force during the ball’s
rise to its peak? (c) What is the change in the
gravitational potential energy of the ball during
the rise to its peak? (d) If the gravitational
potential energy is taken to be zero at the point
where it leaves your hand, what is the
gravitational potential energy when it reaches
the maximum height? (e) What if the
gravitational potential energy is taken to be zero
at the maximum height the ball reaches, what
would the gravitational potential energy be when
it leaves the hand? (f) What is the maximum
height the ball reaches?
8.2 Conservative and Non-Conservative Forces
24. A force acts on a particle as it
moves along the positive x-axis. (a) How much
work does the force do on the particle as it
moves from to (b) Picking
a convenient reference point of the potential
energy to be zero at ∞ find the potential
energy for this force.
25. A force particle. How much work does the force do on
the particle as it moves from acts on a
to
26. 27. Find the force corresponding to the potential
energy
The potential energy function for either one of
the two atoms in a diatomic molecule is often
approximated by where x
is the distance between the atoms. (a) At what
distance of separation does the potential energy
have a local minimum (not at ∞ (b) What
Access for free at openstax.org
is the force on an atom at this separation? (c)
How does the force vary with the separation
distance?
28. A particle of mass moves under the
influence of the force If its
speed at is what is its
speed at
29. A particle of mass moves under the
influence of the force
If its speed at is what
is its speed at
30. A crate on rollers is being pushed without frictional
loss of energy across the floor of a freight car (see
the following figure). The car is moving to the right
with a constant speed If the crate starts at rest
relative to the freight car, then from the work-energy
theorem, where d , the distance the
crate moves, and v, the speed of the crate, are both
measured relative to the freight car. (a) To an
observer at rest beside the tracks, what distance
is the crate pushed when it moves the distance din
the car? (b) What are the crate’s initial and final
speeds and as measured by the observer
beside the tracks? (c) Show that
and, consequently,
that work is equal to the change in kinetic energy in
both reference systems.
8.3 Conservation of Energy
31. A boy throws a ball of mass upward with an initial speed of ball returns to the boy, its speed is straight
When the
How
much much work does air resistance do on the
ball during its flight?
32. 33. A mouse of mass 200 g falls 100 m down a
vertical mine shaft and lands at the bottom with
a speed of 8.0 m/s. During its fall, how much
work is done on the mouse by air resistance?
Using energy considerations and assuming
negligible air resistance, show that a rock
thrown from a bridge 20.0 m above water with
an initial speed of 15.0 m/s strikes the water
with a speed of 24.8 m/s independent of the
direction thrown. (Hint: show that
34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. A 1.0-kg ball at the end of a 2.0-m string swings
in a vertical plane. At its lowest point the ball is
moving with a speed of 10 m/s. (a) What is its
speed at the top of its path? (b) What is the
tension in the string when the ball is at the
bottom and at the top of its path?
Ignoring details associated with friction, extra
forces exerted by arm and leg muscles, and
other factors, we can consider a pole vault as
the conversion of an athlete’s running kinetic
energy to gravitational potential energy. If an
athlete is to lift their body 4.8 m during a vault,
what speed must they have when they plant the
pole?
Tarzan grabs a vine hanging vertically from a tall
tree when he is running at (a) How high
can he swing upward? (b) Does the length of the
vine affect this height?
Assume that the force of a bow on an arrow
behaves like the spring force. In aiming the
arrow, an archer pulls the bow back 50 cm and
holds it in position with a force of . If the
mass of the arrow is and the “spring” is
massless, what is the speed of the arrow
immediately after it leaves the bow?
A man is skiing across level ground at a
speed of when he comes to the small slope
1.8 m higher than ground level shown in the
following figure. (a) If the skier coasts up the hill,
what is his speed when he reaches the top plateau?
Assume friction between the snow and skis is
negligible. (b) What is his speed when he reaches
the upper level if an frictional force acts on
the skis?
A sled of mass 70 kg starts from rest and slides
down a incline long. It then travels for
20 m horizontally before starting back up an
incline. It travels 80 m along this incline before
coming to rest. What is the magnitude of the net
work done on the sled by friction?
A girl on a skateboard (total mass of 40 kg) is
moving at a speed of 10 m/s at the bottom of a
41. 42. 43. 44. 8 • Chapter Review 369
long ramp. The ramp is inclined at with
respect to the horizontal. If she travels 14.2 m
upward along the ramp before stopping, what is
the net frictional force on her?
A baseball of mass 0.25 kg is hit at home plate
with a speed of 40 m/s. When it lands in a seat in
the left-field bleachers a horizontal distance 120
m from home plate, it is moving at 30 m/s. If the
ball lands 20 m above the spot where it was hit,
how much work is done on it by air resistance?
A small block of mass m slides without friction
around the loop-the-loop apparatus shown
below. (a) If the block starts from rest at A , what
is its speed at B ? (b) What is the force of the
track on the block at B ?
The massless spring of a spring gun has a force
constant When the gun is aimed
vertically, a 15-g projectile is shot to a height of
5.0 m above the end of the expanded spring.
(See below.) How much was the spring
compressed initially?
A small ball is tied to a string and set rotating
with negligible friction in a vertical circle. If the
ball moves over the top of the circle at its
slowest possible speed (so that the tension in
the string is negligible), what is the tension in
the string at the bottom of the circle, assuming
there is no additional energy added to the ball
during rotation?
370 8 • Chapter Review
8.4 Potential Energy Diagrams and Stability
45. A mysterious constant force of 10 N acts
horizontally on everything. The direction of the
force is found to be always pointed toward a wall
in a big hall. Find the potential energy of a
particle due to this force when it is at a distance
x from the wall, assuming the potential energy at
the wall to be zero.
46. A single force on a 1.0-kg body. When (in newtons) acts
the speed of
the body is 4.0 m/s. What is its speed at
47. A particle of mass 4.0 kg is constrained to move
along the x-axis under a single force
where The
particle’s speed at A , where is 6.0
m/s. What is its speed at B , where
48. 49. The force on a particle of mass 2.0 kg varies with
position according to (x in
meters, F (x) in newtons). The particle’s velocity
at is 5.0 m/s. Calculate the
mechanical energy of the particle using (a) the
origin as the reference point and (b)
as the reference point. (c) Find the particle’s
velocity at Do this part of the
problem for each reference point.
A 4.0-kg particle moving along the x-axis is acted
upon by the force whose functional form appears
below. The velocity of the particle at is
Find the particle’s speed at
Does the
particle turn around at some point and head back
toward the origin? (e) Repeat part (d) if
50. A particle of mass 0.50 kg moves along the x-axis
with a potential energy whose dependence on x is
shown below. (a) What is the force on the particle at
12 m? (b) If the total
mechanical energy Eof the particle is −6.0 J, what
are the minimum and maximum positions of the
particle? (c) What are these positions if
Access for free at openstax.org
(d) If , what are the speeds of the particle
at the positions listed in part (a)?
51. (a) Sketch a graph of the potential energy
function where
are constants. (b) What is the force
corresponding to this potential energy? (c)
Suppose a particle of mass m moving with this
potential energy has a velocity when its
position is . Show that the particle does
not pass through the origin unless
8.5 Sources of Energy
52. 53. In the cartoon movie P ocahontas
(ht tps:/ / openstax.or g /l/21pocahont clip) ,
Pocahontas runs to the edge of a cliff and jumps
off, showcasing the fun side of her personality.
(a) If she is running at 3.0 m/s before jumping
off the cliff and she hits the water at the bottom
of the cliff at 20.0 m/s, how high is the cliff?
Assume negligible air drag in this cartoon. (b) If
she jumped off the same cliff from a standstill,
how fast would she be falling right before she hit
the water?
In the reality television show “Amazing Race”
(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21amazraceclip), a
contestant is firing 3.0-kg watermelons from a
slingshot to hit targets down the field. The
slingshot is pulled back 2.0 m and the
watermelon is considered to be at ground level.
The launch point is 0.75 m from the ground and
the targets are 10 m horizontally away. Calculate
the spring constant of the slingshot.
54. In the Back t o the F uture movies
(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21bactofutclip), a
DeLorean car of mass 1230 kg travels at 88
miles per hour to venture back to the future. (a)
What is the kinetic energy of the DeLorean? (b)
What spring constant would be needed to stop
this DeLorean in a distance of 0.1m?
55. In the Hung er Games movie
(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21HungGamesclip),
Katniss Everdeen fires a 0.0200-kg arrow from
ground level to pierce an apple up on a stage.
The spring constant of the bow is 330 N/m and
she pulls the arrow back a distance of 0.55 m.
The apple on the stage is 5.00 m higher than the
launching point of the arrow. At what speed does
the arrow (a) leave the bow? (b) strike the apple?
56. In a “Top Fail” video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21topfailvideo), two women run at each other
and collide by hitting exercise balls together. If
each woman has a mass of 50 kg, which
includes the exercise ball, and one woman runs
to the right at 2.0 m/s and the other is running
toward her at 1.0 m/s, (a) how much total kinetic
energy is there in the system? (b) If energy is
conserved after the collision and each exercise
ball has a mass of 2.0 kg, how fast would the
balls fly off toward the camera?
57. In a Coyote/Road Runner cartoon clip
(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21coyroadcarcl), a spring
expands quickly and sends the coyote into a
rock. If the spring extended 5 m and sent the
coyote of mass 20 kg to a speed of 15 m/s, (a)
what is the spring constant of this spring? (b) If
the coyote were sent vertically into the air with
the energy given to him by the spring, how high
could he go if there were no non-conservative
forces?
58. In an iconic movie scene, Forrest Gump
(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ForrGumpvid) runs
around the country. If he is running at a constant
speed of 3 m/s, would it take him more or less
energy to run uphill or downhill and why?
59. In the movie Monty Python and the Hol y Grail
(ht tps:/ / openstax.or g /l/21monp ytmovcl)a cow
is catapulted from the top of a castle wall over to
the people down below. The gravitational
potential energy is set to zero at ground level.
The cow is launched from a spring of spring
constant that is expanded 0.5 m
from equilibrium. If the castle is 9.1 m tall and
the mass of the cow is 110 kg, (a) what is the
gravitational potential energy of the cow at the
top of the castle? (b) What is the elastic spring
energy of the cow before the catapult is
released? (c) What is the speed of the cow right
before it lands on the ground?
8 • Chapter Review 371
60. A 60.0-kg skier with an initial speed of 12.0 m/s
coasts up a 2.50-m high rise as shown. Find her final
speed at the top, given that the coefficient of friction
between her skis and the snow is 0.80.
61. (a) How high a hill can a car coast up (engines
disengaged) if work done by friction is negligible
and its initial speed is 110 km/h? (b) If, in
actuality, a 750-kg car with an initial speed of
110 km/h is observed to coast up a hill to a
height 22.0 m above its starting point, how much
thermal energy was generated by friction? (c)
What is the average force of friction if the hill has
a slope of above the horizontal?
62. A 63. 64. subway train is brought to a
stop from a speed of 0.500 m/s in 0.400 m by a
large spring bumper at the end of its track. What
is the spring constant kof the spring?
A pogo stick has a spring with a spring constant
of which can be compressed
12.0 cm. To what maximum height from the
uncompressed spring can a child jump on the
stick using only the energy in the spring, if the
child and stick have a total mass of 40 kg?
A block of mass 500 g is attached to a spring of
spring constant 80 N/m (see the following figure).
The other end of the spring is attached to a support
while the mass rests on a rough surface with a
coefficient of friction of 0.20 that is inclined at angle
of The block is pushed along the surface till the
spring compresses by 10 cm and is then released
from rest. (a) How much potential energy was stored
in the block-spring-support system when the block
was just released? (b) Determine the speed of the
block when it crosses the point when the spring is
neither compressed nor stretched. (c) Determine the
position of the block where it just comes to rest on
its way up the incline.
372 8 • Chapter Review
65. A block of mass 200 g is attached at the end of a
massless spring at equilibrium length of spring
constant 50 N/m. The other end of the spring is
attached to the ceiling and the mass is released
at a height considered to be where the
gravitational potential energy is zero. (a) What is
the net potential energy of the block at the
instant the block is at the lowest point? (b) What
is the net potential energy of the block at the
midpoint of its descent? (c) What is the speed of
the block at the midpoint of its descent?
66. A T-shirt cannon launches a shirt at 5.00 m/s
from a platform height of 3.00 m from ground
level. How fast will the shirt be traveling if it is
caught by someone whose hands are (a) 1.00 m
from ground level? (b) 4.00 m from ground level?
Neglect air drag.
67. A child (32 kg) jumps up and down on a
trampoline. The trampoline exerts a spring
restoring force on the child with a constant of
5000 N/m. At the highest point of the bounce,
the child is 1.0 m above the level surface of the
trampoline. What is the compression distance of
Additional Problems
69. A massless spring with force constant
hangs from the ceiling. A 2.0-kg
block is attached to the free end of the spring
and released. If the block falls 17 cm before
starting back upwards, how much work is done
by friction during its descent?
70. A particle of mass 2.0 kg moves under the
influence of the force
Suppose a frictional force also acts on the
particle. If the particle’s speed when it starts at
is 0.0 m/s and when it arrives at
is 9.0 m/s, how much work is done on
it by the frictional force between
and
71. Block 2 shown below slides along a frictionless
table as block 1 falls. Both blocks are attached
by a frictionless pulley. Find the speed of the
blocks after they have each moved 2.0 m.
Assume that they start at rest and that the
pulley has negligible mass. Use and
Access for free at openstax.org
68. 72. the trampoline? Neglect the bending of the legs
or any transfer of energy of the child into the
trampoline while jumping.
Shown below is a box of mass that sits on a
frictionless incline at an angle above the
horizontal . This box is connected by a
relatively massless string, over a frictionless
pulley, and finally connected to a box at rest over
the ledge, labeled . If and are a height
habove the ground and : (a) What is
the initial gravitational potential energy of the
system? (b) What is the final kinetic energy of
the system when hits the ground?
A body of mass m and negligible size starts from
rest and slides down the surface of a frictionless
solid sphere of radius R . (See below.) Prove that
the body leaves the sphere when
73. 74. 75. A mysterious force acts on all particles along a
particular line and always points towards a
particular point Pon the line. The magnitude of
the force on a particle increases as the cube of
the distance from that point; that is ∞ , if the
distance from Pto the position of the particle is
r. Let bbe the proportionality constant, and
write the magnitude of the force as .
Find the potential energy of a particle subjected
to this force when the particle is at a distance D
from P , assuming the potential energy to be zero
when the particle is at P .
An object of mass 10 kg is released at point A , slides
to the bottom of the incline, then collides with a
horizontal massless spring, compressing it a
maximum distance of 0.75 m. (See below.) The
spring constant is 500 N/m, the height of the incline
is 2.0 m, and the horizontal surface is frictionless.
(a) What is the speed of the object at the bottom of
the incline? (b) What is the work of friction on the
object while it is on the incline? (c) The spring recoils
and sends the object back toward the incline. What
is the speed of the object when it reaches the base
of the incline? (d) What vertical distance does it
move back up the incline?
Shown below is a small ball of mass m attached
to a string of length a. A small peg is located a
76. 77. 8 • Chapter Review 373
distance hbelow the point where the string is
supported. If the ball is released when the string
is horizontal, show that hmust be greater than
3a/5 if the ball is to swing completely around the
peg.
A block leaves a frictionless inclined surface
horizontally after dropping off by a height h . Find the
horizontal distance Dwhere it will land on the floor,
in terms of h , H , and g.
A block of mass m, after sliding down a frictionless
incline, strikes another block of mass Mthat is
attached to a spring of spring constant k(see
below). The blocks stick together upon impact and
travel together. (a) Find the compression of the
spring in terms of m, M , h , g, and kwhen the
combination comes to rest. Hint: The speed of the
combined blocks is based on the speed
of block m just prior to the collision with the block M
(v1) based on the equation .
This will be discussed further in the chapter on
Linear Momentum and Collisions. (b) The loss of
kinetic energy as a result of the bonding of the two
masses upon impact is stored in the so-called
binding energy of the two masses. Calculate the
binding energy.
374 8 • Chapter Review
78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. A block of mass 300 g is attached to a spring of
spring constant 100 N/m. The other end of the
spring is attached to a support while the block
rests on a smooth horizontal table and can slide
freely without any friction. The block is pushed
horizontally till the spring compresses by 12 cm,
and then the block is released from rest. (a) How
much potential energy was stored in the block-
spring support system when the block was just
released? (b) Determine the speed of the block
when it crosses the point when the spring is
neither compressed nor stretched. (c) Determine
the speed of the block when it has traveled a
distance of 20 cm from where it was released.
Consider a block of mass 0.200 kg attached to a
spring of spring constant 100 N/m. The block is
placed on a frictionless table, and the other end
of the spring is attached to the wall so that the
spring is level with the table. The block is then
pushed in so that the spring is compressed by
10.0 cm. Find the speed of the block as it
crosses (a) the point when the spring is not
stretched, (b) 5.00 cm to the left of point in (a),
and (c) 5.00 cm to the right of point in (a).
A skier starts from rest and slides downhill.
What will be the speed of the skier if he drops by
20 meters in vertical height? Ignore any air
resistance (which will, in reality, be quite a lot),
and any friction between the skis and the snow.
Repeat the preceding problem, but this time,
suppose that the work done by air resistance
cannot be ignored. Let the work done by the air
resistance when the skier goes from Ato Balong
the given hilly path be −2000 J. The work done
by air resistance is negative since the air
resistance acts in the opposite direction to the
displacement. Supposing the mass of the skier is
50 kg, what is the speed of the skier at point B ?
Two bodies are interacting by a conservative
force. Show that the mechanical energy of an
isolated system consisting of two bodies
interacting with a conservative force is
conserved. (Hint : Start by using Newton’s third
law and the definition of work to find the work
done on each body by the conservative force.)
In an amusement park, a car rolls in a track as
shown below. Find the speed of the car at A , B , and
C . Note that the work done by the rolling friction is
zero since the displacement of the point at which
the rolling friction acts on the tires is momentarily at
rest and therefore has a zero displacement.
Access for free at openstax.org
84. 85. 86. 87. 88. A 200-g steel ball is tied to a 2.00-m “massless”
string and hung from the ceiling to make a
pendulum, and then, the ball is brought to a
position making a angle with the vertical
direction and released from rest. Ignoring the
effects of the air resistance, find the speed of the
ball when the string (a) is vertically down, (b)
makes an angle of with the vertical and (c)
makes an angle of with the vertical.
A 300 g hockey puck is shot across an ice-
covered pond. Before the hockey puck was hit,
the puck was at rest. After the hit, the puck has a
speed of 40 m/s. The puck comes to rest after
going a distance of 30 m. (a) Describe how the
energy of the puck changes over time, giving the
numerical values of any work or energy involved.
(b) Find the magnitude of the net friction force.
A projectile of mass 2 kg is fired with a speed of
20 m/s at an angle of with respect to the
horizontal. (a) Calculate the initial total energy of
the projectile given that the reference point of
zero gravitational potential energy at the launch
position. (b) Calculate the kinetic energy at the
highest vertical position of the projectile. (c)
Calculate the gravitational potential energy at
the highest vertical position. (d) Calculate the
maximum height that the projectile reaches.
Compare this result by solving the same
problem using your knowledge of projectile
motion.
An artillery shell is fired at a target 200 m above
the ground. When the shell is 100 m in the air, it
has a speed of 100 m/s. What is its speed when
it hits its target? Neglect air friction.
How much energy is lost to a dissipative drag
force if a 60-kg person falls at a constant speed
for 15 meters?
89. A box slides on a frictionless surface with a total
energy of 50 J. It hits a spring and compresses
the spring a distance of 25 cm from equilibrium.
If the same box with the same initial energy
8 • Chapter Review 375
slides on a rough surface, it only compresses the
spring a distance of 15 cm, how much energy
must have been lost by sliding on the rough
surface?
376 8 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 9
Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.1 The concepts of impulse, momentum, and center of mass are crucial for a major-league baseball player to successfully get a
hit. If he misjudges these quantities, he might break his bat instead. (credit: modification of work by “Cathy T”/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
9.1 Linear Momentum
9.2 Impulse and Collisions
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
9.4 Types of Collisions
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
9.6 Center of Mass
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
INTRODUCTION
The concepts of work, energy, and the work-energy theorem are valuable for two primary reasons:
First, they are powerful computational tools, making it much easier to analyze complex physical systems than is
possible using Newton’s laws directly (for example, systems with nonconstant forces); and second, the observation
that the total energy of a closed system is conserved means that the system can only evolve in ways that are
consistent with energy conservation. In other words, a system cannot evolve randomly; it can only change in ways
that conserve energy.
In this chapter, we develop and define another conserved quantity, called linear momentum, and another
relationship (the impulse-momentum theorem), which will put an additional constraint on how a system evolves in
time. Conservation of momentum is useful for understanding collisions, such as that shown in the above image. It is
just as powerful, just as important, and just as useful as conservation of energy and the work-energy theorem.
378 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
9.1 Linear Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what momentum is, physically
• Calculate the momentum of a moving object
Our study of kinetic energy showed that a complete understanding of an object’s motion must include both its mass
and its velocity ( ). However, as powerful as this concept is, it does not include any information about
the direction of the moving object’s velocity vector. We’ll now define a physical quantity that includes direction.
Like kinetic energy, this quantity includes both mass and velocity; like kinetic energy, it is a way of characterizing the
“quantity of motion” of an object. It is given the name momentum (from the Latin word movimentum, meaning
“movement”), and it is represented by the symbol p.
MOMENTUM
The momentum p of an object is the product of its mass and its velocity:
9.1
FIGURE 9.2 The velocity and momentum vectors for the ball are in the same direction. (credit: modification of work by Ben Sutherland)
As shown in Figure 9.2, momentum is a vector quantity (since velocity is). This is one of the things that makes
momentum useful and not a duplication of kinetic energy. It is perhaps most useful when determining whether an
object’s motion is difficult to change (Figure 9.3) or easy to change (Figure 9.4) over a short time interval.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.1 • Linear Momentum 379
FIGURE 9.3 This supertanker transports a huge mass of oil; as a consequence, it takes a long time for a force to change its (comparatively
small) velocity. (credit: modification of work by “the
tahoe
_
_guy”/Flickr)
FIGURE 9.4 Gas molecules can have very large velocities, but these velocities change nearly instantaneously when they collide with the
container walls or with each other. This is primarily because their masses are so tiny.
Unlike kinetic energy, momentum depends equally on an object’s mass and velocity. For example, as you will learn
when you study thermodynamics, the average speed of an air molecule at room temperature is approximately 500
m/s, with an average molecular mass of ; its momentum is thus
For comparison, a typical automobile might have a speed of only 15 m/s, but a mass of 1400 kg, giving it a
momentum of
These momenta are different by 27 orders of magnitude, or a factor of a billion billion billion!
380 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
9.2 Impulse and Collisions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what an impulse is, physically
• Describe what an impulse does
• Relate impulses to collisions
• Apply the impulse-momentum theorem to solve problems
We have defined momentum to be the product of mass and velocity. Therefore, if an object’s velocity should change
(due to the application of a force on the object), then necessarily, its momentum changes as well. This indicates a
connection between momentum and force. The purpose of this section is to explore and describe that connection.
Suppose you apply a force on a free object for some amount of time. Clearly, the larger the force, the larger the
object’s change of momentum will be. Alternatively, the more time you spend applying this force, again the larger
the change of momentum will be, as depicted in Figure 9.5. The amount by which the object’s motion changes is
therefore proportional to the magnitude of the force, and also to the time interval over which the force is applied.
FIGURE 9.5 The change in momentum of an object is proportional to the length of time during which the force is applied. If a force is
exerted on the lower ball for twice as long as on the upper ball, then the change in the momentum of the lower ball is twice that of the
upper ball.
Mathematically, if a quantity is proportional to two (or more) things, then it is proportional to the product of those
things. The product of a force and a time interval (over which that force acts) is called impulse, and is given the
symbol
IMPULSE
Let be the force applied to an object over some differential time interval dt(Figure 9.6). The resulting
impulse on the object is defined as
9.2
Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 381
FIGURE 9.6 A force applied by a tennis racquet to a tennis ball over a time interval generates an impulse acting on the ball.
The total impulse over the interval is
9.3
Equation 9.2 and Equation 9.3 together say that when a force is applied for an infinitesimal time interval dt , it
causes an infinitesimal impulse , and the total impulse given to the object is defined to be the sum (integral) of all
these infinitesimal impulses.
To calculate the impulse using Equation 9.3, we need to know the force function F (t ), which we often don’t.
However, a result from calculus is useful here: Recall that the average value of a function over some interval is
calculated by
where . Applying this to the time-dependent force function, we obtain
9.4
Therefore, from Equation 9.3,
9.5
The idea here is that you can calculate the impulse on the object even if you don’t know the details of the force as a
function of time; you only need the average force. In fact, though, the process is usually reversed: You determine the
impulse (by measurement or calculation) and then calculate the average force that caused that impulse.
To calculate the impulse, a useful result follows from writing the force in Equation 9.3 as :
382 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
For a constant force , this simplifies to
That is,
9.6
Note that the integral form, Equation 9.3, applies to constant forces as well; in that case, since the force is
independent of time, it comes out of the integral, which can then be trivially evaluated.
EXAMPLE 9.1
The Arizona Meteor Crater
Approximately 50,000 years ago, a large (radius of 25 m) iron-nickel meteorite collided with Earth at an estimated
speed of in what is now the northern Arizona desert, in the United States. The impact produced a
crater that is still visible today (Figure 9.7); it is approximately 1200 m (three-quarters of a mile) in diameter, 170 m
deep, and has a rim that rises 45 m above the surrounding desert plain. Iron-nickel meteorites typically have a
density of . Use impulse considerations to estimate the average force and the maximum force that
the meteor applied to Earth during the impact.
FIGURE 9.7 The Arizona Meteor Crater in Flagstaff, Arizona (often referred to as the Barringer Crater after the person who first suggested
its origin and whose family owns the land). (credit: modification of work by “Shane.torgerson”/Wikimedia Commons)
Strategy
It is conceptually easier to reverse the question and calculate the force that Earth applied on the meteor in order to
stop it. Therefore, we’ll calculate the force on the meteor and then use Newton’s third law to argue that the force
from the meteor on Earth was equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
Using the given data about the meteor, and making reasonable guesses about the shape of the meteor and impact
time, we first calculate the impulse using Equation 9.6. We then use the relationship between force and impulse
Equation 9.5 to estimate the average force during impact. Next, we choose a reasonable force function for the
impact event, calculate the average value of that function Equation 9.4, and set the resulting expression equal to the
calculated average force. This enables us to solve for the maximum force.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 383
Solution
Define upward to be the +y-direction. For simplicity, assume the meteor is traveling vertically downward prior to
impact. In that case, its initial velocity is , and the force Earth exerts on the meteor points upward,
. The situation at is depicted below.
The average force during the impact is related to the impulse by
From Equation 9.6, , so we have
The mass is equal to the product of the meteor’s density and its volume:
If we assume (guess) that the meteor was roughly spherical, we have
Thus we obtain
The problem says the velocity at impact was primary impact lasted about (the final velocity is zero); also, we guess that the
. Substituting these values gives
This is the average force applied during the collision. Notice that this force vector points in the same direction as the
change of velocity vector .
Next, we calculate the maximum force. The impulse is related to the force function by
384 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
We need to make a reasonable choice for the force as a function of time. We define to be the moment the
meteor first touches the ground. Then we assume the force is a maximum at impact, and rapidly drops to zero. A
function that does this is
(The parameter represents how rapidly the force decreases to zero.) The average force is
where obtain .
Choosing integral evaluates to
. Since we already have a numeric value for , we can use the result of the integral to
(this is a common choice, as you will see in later chapters), and guessing that , this
Thus, the maximum force has a magnitude of
The complete force function, including the direction, is
This is the force Earth applied to the meteor; by Newton’s third law, the force the meteor applied to Earth is
which is the answer to the original question.
Significance
The graph of this function contains important information. Let’s graph (the magnitude of) both this function and the
average force together (Figure 9.8).
FIGURE 9.8 A graph of the average force (in red) and the force as a function of time (blue) of the meteor impact. The areas under the curves
Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 385
are equal to each other, and are numerically equal to the applied impulse.
Notice that the area under each plot has been filled in. For the plot of the (constant) force , the area is a
rectangle, corresponding to . As for the plot of F (t ), recall from calculus that the area under the plot of a
function is numerically equal to the integral of that function, over the specified interval; so here, that is
. Thus, the areas are equal, and both represent the impulse that the meteor applied to Earth
during the two-second impact. The average force on Earth sounds like a huge force, and it is. Nevertheless, Earth
barely noticed it. The acceleration Earth obtained was just
which is completely immeasurable. That said, the impact created seismic waves that nowadays could be detected
by modern monitoring equipment.
EXAMPLE 9.2
The Benefits of Impulse
A car traveling at 27 m/s collides with a building. The collision with the building causes the car to come to a stop in
approximately 1 second. The driver, who weighs 860 N, is protected by a combination of a variable-tension seatbelt
and an airbag (Figure 9.9). (In effect, the driver collides with the seatbelt and airbag and notwith the building.) The
airbag and seatbelt slow his velocity, such that he comes to a stop in approximately 2.5 s.
a. b. What average force does the driver experience during the collision?
Without the seatbelt and airbag, his collision time (with the steering wheel) would have been approximately
0.20 s. What force would he experience in this case?
FIGURE 9.9 The motion of a car and its driver at the instant before and the instant after colliding with the wall. The restrained driver
experiences a large backward force from the seatbelt and airbag, which causes his velocity to decrease to zero. (The forward force from the
seatbelt is much smaller than the backward force, so we neglect it in the solution.)
Strategy
We are given the driver’s weight, his initial and final velocities, and the time of collision; we are asked to calculate a
force. Impulse seems the right way to tackle this; we can combine Equation 9.5 and Equation 9.6.
Solution
a. Define the +x-direction to be the direction the car is initially moving. We know
and
386 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Since Jis equal to both those things, they must be equal to each other:
We need to convert this weight to the equivalent mass, expressed in SI units:
Remembering that , and noting that the final velocity is zero, we solve for the force:
b. The negative sign implies that the force slows him down. For perspective, this is about 1.1 times his own
weight.
Same calculation, just the different time interval:
which is about 14 times his own weight. Big difference!
Significance
You see that the value of an airbag is how greatly it reduces the force on the vehicle occupants. For this reason, they
have been required on all passenger vehicles in the United States since 1991, and have been commonplace
throughout Europe and Asia since the mid-1990s. The change of momentum in a crash is the same, with or without
an airbag; the force, however, is vastly different.
Effect of Impulse
Since an impulse is a force acting for some amount of time, it causes an object’s motion to change. Recall Equation
9.6:
Because is the momentum of a system, relation, called the impulse-momentum theorem (or relation).
is the chang e of momentum . This gives us the following
IMPULSE-MOMENTUM THEOREM
An impulse applied to a system changes the system’s momentum, and that change of momentum is exactly
equal to the impulse that was applied:
9.7
The impulse-momentum theorem is depicted graphically in Figure 9.10.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 387
is very different from an impulse of
FIGURE 9.10 Illustration of impulse-momentum theorem. (a) A ball with initial velocity and momentum This impulse is added vectorially to the initial momentum. (c) Thus, the impulse equals the change in momentum, impulse, the ball moves off with its new momentum
receives an impulse . (b)
. (d) After the
There are two crucial concepts in the impulse-momentum theorem:
1. 2. Impulse is a vector quantity; an impulse of, say, ; they cause completely opposite changes of momentum.
An impulse does not cause momentum; rather, it causes a chang e in the momentum of an object. Thus, you
must subtract the initial momentum from the final momentum, and—since momentum is also a vector
quantity—you must take careful account of the signs of the momentum vectors.
The most common questions asked in relation to impulse are to calculate the applied force, or the change of velocity
that occurs as a result of applying an impulse. The general approach is the same.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Impulse-Momentum Theorem
1. 2. 3. Express the impulse as force times the relevant time interval.
Express the impulse as the change of momentum, usually .
Equate these and solve for the desired quantity.
388 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
EXAMPLE 9.3
Moving the Ent erprise
FIGURE 9.11 The fictional starship Ent erprise from the Star Trek adventures operated on so-called “impulse engines” that combined
matter with antimatter to produce energy.
When Captain Picard commands, “Take us out,” the starship Ent erprise (Figure 9.11) starts from rest to a final speed
of . Assuming this maneuver is completed in 60 s, what average force did the impulse engines
apply to the ship?
Strategy
We are asked for a force; we know the initial and final speeds (and hence the change in speed), and we know the
time interval over which this all happened. In particular, we know the amount of time that the force acted. This
suggests using the impulse-momentum relation. To use that, though, we need the mass of the Ent erprise. An
internet search gives a best estimate of the mass of the Ent erprise (in the 2009 movie) as .
Solution
Because this problem involves only one direction (i.e., the direction of the force applied by the engines), we only
need the scalar form of the impulse-momentum theorem Equation 9.7, which is
with
and
Equating these expressions gives
Solving for the magnitude of the force and inserting the given values leads to
Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 389
Significance
Using Newton's Second Law, this force causes an acceleration of . This is 130,000 times gravity,
which is unimaginably huge. It goes almost without saying that such a force would kill everyone on board instantly,
as well as destroying every piece of equipment. Fortunately, the Ent erprise has “inertial dampeners.” It is left as an
exercise for the reader’s imagination to determine how these work.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.1
The U.S. Air Force uses “10gs” (an acceleration equal to ) as the maximum acceleration a human can
withstand (but only for several seconds) and survive. How much time must the Ent erprise spend accelerating if the
humans on board are to experience an average of at most 10gs of acceleration? (Assume the inertial dampeners are
offline.)
EXAMPLE 9.4
The iPhone Drop
Apple released its iPhone 6 Plus in November 2014. According to many reports, it was originally supposed to have a
screen made from sapphire, but that was changed at the last minute for a hardened glass screen. Reportedly, this
was because the sapphire screen cracked when the phone was dropped. What force did the iPhone 6 Plus
experience as a result of being dropped?
Strategy
The force the phone experiences is due to the impulse applied to it by the floor when the phone collides with the
floor. Our strategy then is to use the impulse-momentum relationship. We calculate the impulse, estimate the
impact time, and use this to calculate the force.
We need to make a couple of reasonable estimates, as well as find technical data on the phone itself. First, let’s
suppose that the phone is most often dropped from about chest height on an average-height person. Second,
assume that it is dropped from rest, that is, with an initial vertical velocity of zero. Finally, we assume that the phone
bounces very little—the height of its bounce is assumed to be negligible.
Solution
Define upward to be the +y-direction. A typical height is approximately and, as stated, average force on the phone is related to the impulse the floor applies on it during the collision:
. The
The impulse equals the change in momentum,
so
Next, the change of momentum is
We need to be careful with the velocities here; this is the change of velocity due to the collision with the floor. But
the phone also has an initial drop velocity [ ], so we label our velocities. Let:
• the initial velocity with which the phone was dropped (zero, in this example)
390 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
• the velocity the phone had the instant just before it hit the floor
• the final velocity of the phone as a result of hitting the floor
Figure 9.12 shows the velocities at each of these points in the phone’s trajectory.
FIGURE 9.12 (a) The initial velocity of the phone is zero, just after the person drops it. (b) Just before the phone hits the floor, its velocity is
which is unknown at the moment, except for its direction, which is downward (c) After bouncing off the floor, the phone has a
velocity , which is also unknown, except for its direction, which is upward
With these definitions, the change of momentum of the phone during the collision with the floor is
Since we assume the phone doesn’t bounce at all when it hits the floor (or at least, the bounce height is negligible),
then is zero, so
We can get the speed of the phone just before it hits the floor using either kinematics or conservation of energy.
We’ll use conservation of energy here; you should re-do this part of the problem using kinematics and prove that you
get the same answer.
First, define the zero of potential energy to be located at the floor. Conservation of energy then gives us:
Defining and using gives
Because the expression for force gives
is a vector magnitude, it must be positive. Thus, . Inserting this result into
Access for free at openstax.org
9.2 • Impulse and Collisions 391
Finally, we need to estimate the collision time. One common way to estimate a collision time is to calculate how long
the object would take to travel its own length. The phone is moving at 5.4 m/s just before it hits the floor, and it is
0.14 m long, giving an estimated collision time of 0.026 s. Inserting the given numbers, we obtain
Significance
The iPhone itself weighs just times its weight.
; the force the floor applies to it is therefore over 20
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.2
What if we had assumed the phone didbounce on impact? Would this have increased the force on the iPhone,
decreased it, or made no difference?
Momentum and Force
In Example 9.3, we obtained an important relationship:
9.8
In words, the average force applied to an object is equal to the change of the momentum that the force causes,
divided by the time interval over which this change of momentum occurs. This relationship is very useful in
situations where the collision time is small, but measureable; typical values would be 1/10th of a second, or
even one thousandth of a second. Car crashes, punting a football, or collisions of subatomic particles would meet
this criterion.
For a continuousl y changing momentum—due to a continuously changing force—this becomes a powerful
conceptual tool. In the limit , Equation 9.2 becomes
9.9
This says that the rate of change of the system’s momentum (implying that momentum is a function of time) is
exactly equal to the net applied force (also, in general, a function of time). This is, in fact, Newton’s second law,
written in terms of momentum rather than acceleration. This is the relationship Newton himself presented in his
P rincipia Mathematica (although he called it “quantity of motion” rather than “momentum”).
If the mass of the system remains constant, Equation 9.3 reduces to the more familiar form of Newton’s second law.
We can see this by substituting the definition of momentum:
The assumption of constant mass allowed us to pull m out of the derivative. If the mass is not constant, we cannot
392 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
use this form of the second law, but instead must start from Equation 9.3. Thus, one advantage to expressing force
in terms of changing momentum is that it allows for the mass of the system to change, as well as the velocity; this is
a concept we’ll explore when we study the motion of rockets.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW OF MOTION IN TERMS OF MOMENTUM
The net external force on a system is equal to the rate of change of the momentum of that system caused by the
force:
Although Equation 9.3 allows for changing mass, as we will see in Rocket Propulsion, the relationship between
momentum and force remains useful when the mass of the system is constant, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 9.5
Calculating Force: Venus Williams’ Tennis Serve
During the 2007 French Open, Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a premier women’s match, reaching a
speed of 58 m/s (209 km/h). What is the average force exerted on the 0.057-kg tennis ball by Venus Williams’
racquet? Assume that the ball’s speed just after impact is 58 m/s, as shown in Figure 9.13, that the initial horizontal
component of the velocity before impact is negligible, and that the ball remained in contact with the racquet for 5.0
ms.
FIGURE 9.13 The final velocity of the tennis ball is .
Strategy
This problem involves only one dimension because the ball starts from having no horizontal velocity component
before impact. Newton’s second law stated in terms of momentum is then written as
As noted above, when mass is constant, the change in momentum is given by
Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 393
where we have used scalars because this problem involves only one dimension. In this example, the velocity just
after impact and the time interval are given; thus, once is calculated, we can use to find the force.
Solution
To determine the change in momentum, insert the values for the initial and final velocities into the equation above:
Now the magnitude of the net external force can be determined by using
where we have retained only two significant figures in the final step.
Significance
This quantity was the average force exerted by Venus Williams’ racquet on the tennis ball during its brief impact
(note that the ball also experienced the 0.57-N force of gravity, but that force was not due to the racquet). This
problem could also be solved by first finding the acceleration and then using , but one additional step would
be required compared with the strategy used in this example.
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the meaning of “conservation of momentum”
• Correctly identify if a system is, or is not, closed
• Define a system whose momentum is conserved
• Mathematically express conservation of momentum for a given system
• Calculate an unknown quantity using conservation of momentum
Recall Newton’s third law: When two objects of masses and interact (meaning that they apply forces on each
other), the force that object 2 applies to object 1 is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that
object 1 applies on object 2. Let:
• the force on from
• the force on from
Then, in symbols, Newton’s third law says
9.10
(Recall that these two forces do not cancel because they are applied to different objects. accelerate, and causes to accelerate.)
causes to
Although the magnitudes of the forces on the objects are the same, the accelerations are not, simply because the
masses (in general) are different. Therefore, the changes in velocity of each object are different:
However, the products of the mass and the change of velocity are equal (in magnitude):
394 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
9.11
It’s a good idea, at this point, to make sure you’re clear on the physical meaning of the derivatives in Equation 9.3.
Because of the interaction, each object ends up getting its velocity changed, by an amount dv. Furthermore, the
interaction occurs over a time interval dt , which means that the change of velocities also occurs over dt . This time
interval is the same for each object.
Let‘s assume, for the moment, that the masses of the objects do not change during the interaction. (We’ll relax this
restriction later.) In that case, we can pull the masses inside the derivatives:
9.12
and thus
9.13
This says that the rat e at which momentum chang es is the same f or both objects. The masses are different, and the
changes of velocity are different, but the rate of change of the product of m and are the same.
Physically, this means that during the interaction of the two objects ( ), both objects have their
momentum changed; but those changes are identical in magnitude, though opposite in sign. For example, the
momentum of object 1 might increase, which means that the momentum of object 2 decreases by exactly the same
amount.
In light of this, let’s re-write Equation 9.12 in a more suggestive form:
9.14
This says that during the interaction, although object 1’s momentum changes, and object 2’s momentum also
changes, these two changes cancel each other out, so that the total change of momentum of the two objects
together is zero.
Since the total combined momentum of the two objects together never changes, then we could write
9.15
from which it follows that
9.16
As shown in Figure 9.14, the total momentum of the system before and after the collision remains the same.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 395
FIGURE 9.14 Before the collision, the two billiard balls travel with momenta and . The total momentum of the system is the sum of
these, as shown by the red vector labeled on the left. After the collision, the two billiard balls travel with different momenta and
. The total momentum, however, has not changed, as shown by the red vector arrow on the right.
Generalizing this result to Nobjects, we obtain
9.17
Equation 9.17 is the definition of the total (or net) momentum of a system of Ninteracting objects, along with the
statement that the total momentum of a system of objects is constant in time—or better, is conserved.
CONSERVATION LAWS
If the value of a physical quantity is constant in time, we say that the quantity is conserved.
Requirements for Momentum Conservation
There is a complication, however. A system must meet two requirements for its momentum to be conserved:
1. The mass of the s yst em must remain constant during the int eraction.
As the objects interact (apply forces on each other), they may transf er mass from one to another; but any
mass one object gains is balanced by the loss of that mass from another. The total mass of the system of
objects, therefore, remains unchanged as time passes:
2. The net ext ernal f orce on the s yst em must be zero .
As the objects collide, or explode, and move around, they exert forces on each other. However, all of these
forces are internal to the system, and thus each of these internal forces is balanced by another internal force
that is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign. As a result, the change in momentum caused by each internal
force is cancelled by another momentum change that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
Therefore, internal forces cannot change the total momentum of a system because the changes sum to zero.
However, if there is some external force that acts on all of the objects (gravity, for example, or friction), then
this force changes the momentum of the system as a whole; that is to say, the momentum of the system is
changed by the external force. Thus, for the momentum of the system to be conserved, we must have
396 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
A system of objects that meets these two requirements is said to be a closed system (also called an isolated
system). Thus, the more compact way to express this is shown below.
LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM
The total momentum of a closed system is conserved:
This statement is called the Law of Conservation of Momentum. Along with the conservation of energy, it is one of
the foundations upon which all of physics stands. All our experimental evidence supports this statement: from the
motions of galactic clusters to the quarks that make up the proton and the neutron, and at every scale in between.
In a closed s yst em, the t otal momentum never chang es.
Note that there absolutely can be external forces acting on the system; but for the system’s momentum to remain
constant, these external forces have to cancel, so that the netexternal force is zero. Billiard balls on a table all have
a weight force acting on them, but the weights are balanced (canceled) by the normal forces, so there is no net
force.
The Meaning of ‘System’
A system (mechanical) is the collection of objects in whose motion (kinematics and dynamics) you are interested. If
you are analyzing the bounce of a ball on the ground, you are probably only interested in the motion of the ball, and
not of Earth; thus, the ball is your system. If you are analyzing a car crash, the two cars together compose your
system (Figure 9.15).
FIGURE 9.15 The two cars together form the system that is to be analyzed. It is important to remember that the contents (the mass) of the
system do not change before, during, or after the objects in the system interact.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Conservation of Momentum
Using conservation of momentum requires four basic steps. The first step is crucial:
Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 397
1. 2. 3. 4. Identify a closed system (total mass is constant, no net external force acts on the system).
Write down an expression representing the total momentum of the system before the “event” (explosion or
collision).
Write down an expression representing the total momentum of the system after the “event.”
Set these two expressions equal to each other, and solve this equation for the desired quantity.
EXAMPLE 9.6
Colliding Carts
Two carts in a physics lab roll on a level track, with negligible friction. These carts have small magnets at their ends,
so that when they collide, they stick together (Figure 9.16). The first cart has a mass of 675 grams and is rolling at
0.75 m/s to the right; the second has a mass of 500 grams and is rolling at 1.33 m/s, also to the right. After the
collision, what is the velocity of the two joined carts?
FIGURE 9.16 Two lab carts collide and stick together after the collision.
Strategy
We have a collision. We’re given masses and initial velocities; we’re asked for the final velocity. This all suggests
using conservation of momentum as a method of solution. However, we can only use it if we have a closed system.
So we need to be sure that the system we choose has no net external force on it, and that its mass is not changed by
the collision.
Defining the system to be the two carts meets the requirements for a closed system: The combined mass of the two
carts certainly doesn’t change, and while the carts definitely exert forces on each other, those forces are internal to
the system, so they do not change the momentum of the system as a whole. In the vertical direction, the weights of
the carts are canceled by the normal forces on the carts from the track.
Solution
Conservation of momentum is
Define the direction of their initial velocity vectors to be the +x-direction. The initial momentum is then
The final momentum of the now-linked carts is
Equating:
Substituting the given numbers:
398 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Significance
The principles that apply here to two laboratory carts apply identically to all objects of whatever type or size. Even
for photons, the concepts of momentum and conservation of momentum are still crucially important even at that
scale. (Since they are massless, the momentum of a photon is defined very differently from the momentum of
ordinary objects. You will learn about this when you study quantum physics.)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.3
Suppose the second, smaller cart had been initially moving to the left. What would the sign of the final velocity have
been in this case?
EXAMPLE 9.7
A Bouncing Superball
A superball of mass 0.25 kg is dropped from rest from a height of loss of energy and returns to its initial height (Figure 9.17).
a. b. c. What is the superball’s change of momentum during its bounce on the floor?
What was Earth’s change of momentum due to the ball colliding with the floor?
What was Earth’s change of velocity as a result of this collision?
(This example shows that you have to be careful about defining your system.)
above the floor. It bounces with no
FIGURE 9.17 A superball is dropped to the floor ( ), hits the floor ( ), bounces ( ), and returns to its initial height ( ).
Strategy
Since we are asked only about the ball’s change of momentum, we define our system to be the ball. But this is
Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 399
clearly not a closed system; gravity applies a downward force on the ball while it is falling, and the normal force from
the floor applies a force during the bounce. Thus, we cannot use conservation of momentum as a strategy. Instead,
we simply determine the ball’s momentum just before it collides with the floor and just after, and calculate the
difference. We have the ball’s mass, so we need its velocities.
Solution
a. Since this is a one-dimensional problem, we use the scalar form of the equations. Let:
◦ the magnitude of the ball’s momentum at time , the moment it was released; since it was dropped
from rest, this is zero.
◦ the magnitude of the ball’s momentum at time ◦ the magnitude of the ball’s momentum at time , the instant just before it hits the floor.
, just after it loses contact with the floor after the
bounce.
The ball’s change of momentum is
Its velocity just before it hits the floor can be determined from either conservation of energy or kinematics. We
use kinematics here; you should re-solve it using conservation of energy and confirm you get the same result.
We want the velocity just before it hits the ground (at time ). We know its initial velocity (at time ),
the height it falls, and its acceleration; we don’t know the fall time. We could calculate that, but instead we use
Thus the ball has a momentum of
We don’t have an easy way to calculate the momentum after the bounce. Instead, we reason from the
symmetry of the situation.
Before the bounce, the ball starts with zero velocity and falls 1.50 m under the influence of gravity, achieving
some amount of momentum just before it hits the ground. On the return trip (after the bounce), it starts with
some amount of momentum, rises the same 1.50 m it fell, and ends with zero velocity. Thus, the motion after
the bounce was the mirror image of the motion before the bounce. From this symmetry, it must be true that
the ball’s momentum after the bounce must be equal and opposite to its momentum before the bounce. (This
is a subtle but crucial argument; make sure you understand it before you go on.)
Therefore,
Thus, the ball’s change of momentum during the bounce is
b. What was Earth’s change of momentum due to the ball colliding with the floor?
Your instinctive response may well have been either “zero; the Earth is just too massive for that tiny ball to
have affected it” or possibly, “more than zero, but utterly negligible.” But no—if we re-define our system to be
the Superball + Earth, then this system is closed (neglecting the gravitational pulls of the Sun, the Moon, and
the other planets in the solar system), and therefore the total change of momentum of this new system must
be zero. Therefore, Earth’s change of momentum is exactly the same magnitude:
c. What was Earth’s change of velocity as a result of this collision?
400 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
This is where your instinctive feeling is probably correct:
This change of Earth’s velocity is utterly negligible.
Significance
It is important to realize that the answer to part (c) is not a velocity; it is a change of velocity, which is a very
different thing. Nevertheless, to give you a feel for just how small that change of velocity is, suppose you were
moving with a velocity of . At this speed, it would take you about 7 million years to travel a
distance equal to the diameter of a hydrogen atom.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.4
Would the ball’s change of momentum have been larger, smaller, or the same, if it had collided with the floor and
stopped (without bouncing)?
EXAMPLE 9.8
Ice Hockey 1
Two hockey pucks of identical mass are on a flat, horizontal ice hockey rink. The red puck is motionless; the blue
puck is moving at 2.5 m/s to the left (Figure 9.18). It collides with the motionless red puck. The pucks have a mass
of 15 g. After the collision, the red puck is moving at 2.5 m/s, to the left. What is the final velocity of the blue puck?
FIGURE 9.18 Two identical hockey pucks colliding. The top diagram shows the pucks the instant before the collision, and the bottom
diagram show the pucks the instant after the collision. The net external force is zero.
Strategy
We’re told that we have two colliding objects, we’re told the masses and initial velocities, and one final velocity;
we’re asked for both final velocities. Conservation of momentum seems like a good strategy. Define the system to be
the two pucks; there’s no friction, so we have a closed system.
Before you look at the solution, what do you think the answer will be?
The blue puck final velocity will be:
• zero
• 2.5 m/s to the left
• 2.5 m/s to the right
• 1.25 m/s to the left
• 1.25 m/s to the right
Access for free at openstax.org
9.3 • Conservation of Linear Momentum 401
• something else
Solution
Define the +x-direction to point to the right. Conservation of momentum then reads
Before the collision, the momentum of the system is entirely and only in the blue puck. Thus,
(Remember that the masses of the pucks are equal.) Substituting numbers:
Significance
Evidently, the two pucks simply exchanged momentum. The blue puck transferred all of its momentum to the red
puck. In fact, this is what happens in similar collision where
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.5
Even if there were some friction on the ice, it is still possible to use conservation of momentum to solve this
problem, but you would need to impose an additional condition on the problem. What is that additional condition?
EXAMPLE 9.9
Landing of Philae
On November 12, 2014, the European Space Agency successfully landed a probe named Philae on Comet 67P/
Churyumov/Gerasimenko (Figure 9.19). During the landing, however, the probe actually landed three times, because
it bounced twice. Let’s calculate how much the comet’s speed changed as a result of the first bounce.
FIGURE 9.19 An artist’s rendering of Philae landing on a comet. (credit: modification of work by “DLR German Aerospace Center”/Flickr)
402 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Let’s define upward to be the +y-direction, perpendicular to the surface of the comet, and of the comet. Here’s what we know:
to be at the surface
• The mass of Comet 67P:
• The acceleration due to the comet’s gravity:
• Philae’ s mass:
• Initial touchdown speed:
• Initial upward speed due to first bounce:
• Landing impact time:
Strategy
We’re asked for how much the comet’s speed changed, but we don’t know much about the comet, beyond its mass
and the acceleration its gravity causes. However, we are told that the Philae lander collides with (lands on) the
comet, and bounces off of it. A collision suggests momentum as a strategy for solving this problem.
If we define a system that consists of both Philae and Comet 67/P, then there is no net external force on this system,
and thus the momentum of this system is conserved. (We’ll neglect the gravitational force of the sun.) Thus, if we
calculate the change of momentum of the lander, we automatically have the change of momentum of the comet.
Also, the comet’s change of velocity is directly related to its change of momentum as a result of the lander
“colliding” with it.
Solution
Let be its momentum just after the first
be Philae’ s momentum at the moment just before touchdown, and bounce. Then its momentum just before landing was
and just after was
Therefore, the lander’s change of momentum during the first bounce is
Notice how important it is to include the negative sign of the initial momentum.
Now for the comet. Since momentum of the system must be conserved, the comet’ s momentum changed by exactly
the negative of this:
Therefore, its change of velocity is
Significance
This is a very small change in velocity, about a thousandth of a billionth of a meter per second. Crucially, however, it
is notzero.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.6
The changes of momentum for Philae and for Comet 67/P were equal (in magnitude). Were the impulses
experienced by Philae and the comet equal? How about the forces? How about the changes of kinetic energies?
Access for free at openstax.org
9.4 • Types of Collisions 403
9.4 Types of Collisions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the type of collision
• Correctly label a collision as elastic or inelastic
• Use kinetic energy along with momentum and impulse to analyze a collision
Although momentum is conserved in all interactions, not all interactions (collisions or explosions) are the same. The
possibilities include:
• A single object can explode into multiple objects (explosions).
• Multiple objects can collide and bounce off each other, called an elastic collision, resulting in the same kinetic
energy of the system before and after the collision.
• Multiple objects can collide and the system loses kinetic energy, called an inelastic collision. One such case is
where the two objects stick together, forming a single object.
It’s useful, therefore, to categorize different types of interactions, according to how the interacting objects move
before and after the interaction.
Explosions
The first possibility is that a single object may break apart into two or more pieces. An example of this is a
firecracker, or a bow and arrow, or a rocket rising through the air toward space. These can be difficult to analyze if
the number of fragments after the collision is more than about three or four; but nevertheless, the total momentum
of the system before and after the explosion is identical.
Note that if the object is initially motionless, then the system (which is just the object) has no momentum and no
kinetic energy. After the explosion, the net momentum of all the pieces of the object must sum to zero (since the
momentum of this closed system cannot change). However, the system wil lhave a great deal of kinetic energy after
the explosion, although it had none before. Thus, we see that, although the momentum of the system is conserved
in an explosion, the kinetic energy of the system most definitely is not; it increases. This interaction—one object
becoming many, with an increase of kinetic energy of the system—is called an explosion.
Where does the energy come from? Does conservation of energy still hold? Yes; some form of potential energy is
converted to kinetic energy. In the case of gunpowder burning and pushing out a bullet, chemical potential energy is
converted to kinetic energy of the bullet, and of the recoiling gun. For a bow and arrow, it is elastic potential energy
in the bowstring.
Inelastic
The second possibility is the reverse: that two or more objects collide with each other and stick together, thus (after
the collision) forming one single composite object. The total mass of this composite object is the sum of the masses
of the original objects, and the new single object moves with a velocity dictated by the conservation of momentum.
However, it turns out again that, although the total momentum of the system of objects remains constant, the kinetic
energy doesn’t; but this time, the kinetic energy decreases. This type of collision is called inelastic.
Any collision where the objects stick together will result in the maximum loss of kinetic energy (i.e., will be a
minimum).
Such a collision is called perfectly inelastic. In the extreme case, multiple objects collide, stick together, and
remain motionless after the collision. Since the objects are all motionless after the collision, the final kinetic energy
is also zero; therefore, the loss of kinetic energy is a maximum.
• If • If • If , the collision is inelastic.
is the lowest energy, or the energy lost by both objects is the most, the collision is perfectly inelastic
(objects stick together).
, the collision is elastic.
404 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Elastic
The extreme case on the other end is if two or more objects approach each other, collide, and bounce off each other,
moving away from each other at the same relative speed at which they approached each other. In this case, the total
kinetic energy of the system is conserved. Such an interaction is called elastic.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Collisions
A closed system always conserves momentum; it might also conserve kinetic energy, but very often it doesn’t.
Energy-momentum problems confined to a plane (as ours are) usually have two unknowns. Generally, this approach
works well:
1. Define a closed system.
2. 3. Write down the expression for conservation of momentum.
If kinetic energy is conserved, write down the expression for conservation of kinetic energy; if not, write down
the expression for the change of kinetic energy.
4. You now have two equations in two unknowns, which you solve by standard methods.
EXAMPLE 9.10
Formation of a Deuteron
A proton (mass ) collides with a neutron (with essentially the same mass as the proton) to form a
particle called a deut eron. What is the velocity of the deuteron if it is formed from a proton moving with velocity
to the right and a neutron moving with velocity to the left?
Strategy
Define the system to be the two particles. This is a collision, so we should first identify what kind. Since we are told
the two particles form a single particle after the collision, this means that the collision is perfectly inelastic. Thus,
kinetic energy is not conserved, but momentum is. Thus, we use conservation of momentum to determine the final
velocity of the system.
Solution
Treat the two particles as having identical masses M . Use the subscripts p, n, and d for proton, neutron, and
deuteron, respectively. This is a one-dimensional problem, so we have
The masses divide out:
The velocity is thus .
Significance
This is essentially how particle colliders like the Large Hadron Collider work: They accelerate particles up to very
Access for free at openstax.org
9.4 • Types of Collisions 405
high speeds (large momenta), but in opposite directions. This maximizes the creation of so-called “daughter
particles.
”
EXAMPLE 9.11
Ice Hockey 2
(This is a variation of an earlier example.)
Two ice hockey pucks of different masses are on a flat, horizontal hockey rink. The red puck has a mass of 15 grams,
and is motionless; the blue puck has a mass of 12 grams, and is moving at 2.5 m/s to the left. It collides with the
motionless red puck (Figure 9.20). If the collision is perfectly elastic, what are the final velocities of the two pucks?
FIGURE 9.20 Two different hockey pucks colliding. The top diagram shows the pucks the instant before the collision, and the bottom
diagram show the pucks the instant after the collision. The net external force is zero.
Strategy
We’re told that we have two colliding objects, and we’re told their masses and initial velocities; we’re asked for both
final velocities. Conservation of momentum seems like a good strategy; define the system to be the two pucks.
There is no friction, so we have a closed system. We have two unknowns (the two final velocities), but only one
equation. The comment about the collision being perfectly elastic is the clue; it suggests that kinetic energy is also
conserved in this collision. That gives us our second equation.
The initial momentum and initial kinetic energy of the system resides entirely and only in the second puck (the blue
one); the collision transfers some of this momentum and energy to the first puck.
Solution
Conservation of momentum, in this case, reads
Conservation of kinetic energy reads
There are our two equations in two unknowns. The algebra is tedious but not terribly difficult; you definitely should
work it through. The solution is
Substituting with the given numbers where a positive direction is to the left, we obtain
406 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Significance
Notice that after the collision, the blue puck is moving to the right; its direction of motion was reversed. The red
puck is now moving to the left.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.7
There is a possible mathematical second to the system of equations solved in this example (because the energy
equation is quadratic): . This solution is unacceptable on physical grounds; what’s wrong
with it?
EXAMPLE 9.12
Thor vs. Iron Man
The 2012 movie “The Avengers” has a scene where Iron Man and Thor fight. At the beginning of the fight, Thor
throws his hammer at Iron Man, hitting him and throwing him slightly up into the air and against a small tree, which
breaks. From the video, Iron Man is standing still when the hammer hits him. The distance between Thor and Iron
Man is approximately 10 m, and the hammer takes about 1 s to reach Iron Man after Thor releases it. The tree is
about 2 m behind Iron Man, which he hits in about 0.75 s. Also from the video, Iron Man’s trajectory to the tree is
very close to horizontal. Assuming Iron Man’s total mass is 200 kg:
a. b. Estimate the mass of Thor’s hammer
Estimate how much kinetic energy was lost in this collision
Strategy
After the collision, Thor’s hammer is in contact with Iron Man for the entire time, so this is a perfectly inelastic
collision. Thus, with the correct choice of a closed system, we expect momentum is conserved, but not kinetic
energy. We use the given numbers to estimate the initial momentum, the initial kinetic energy, and the final kinetic
energy. Because this is a one-dimensional problem, we can go directly to the scalar form of the equations.
Solution
a. First, we posit conservation of momentum. For that, we need a closed system. The choice here is the system
(hammer + Iron Man), from the time of collision to the moment just before Iron Man and the hammer hit the
tree. Let:
◦ mass of the hammer
◦ mass of Iron Man
◦ velocity of the hammer before hitting Iron Man
◦ v combined velocity of Iron Man + hammer after the collision
Again, Iron Man’s initial velocity was zero. Conservation of momentum here reads:
We are asked to find the mass of the hammer, so we have
Access for free at openstax.org
9.4 • Types of Collisions 407
b. Considering the uncertainties in our estimates, this should be expressed with just one significant figure; thus,
.
The initial kinetic energy of the system, like the initial momentum, is all in the hammer:
After the collision,
Thus, there was a loss of .
Significance
From other scenes in the movie, Thor apparently can control the hammer’s velocity with his mind. It is possible,
therefore, that he mentally causes the hammer to maintain its initial velocity of 10 m/s while Iron Man is being
driven backward toward the tree. If so, this would represent an external force on our system, so it would not be
closed. Thor’s mental control of his hammer is beyond the scope of this book, however.
EXAMPLE 9.13
Analyzing a Car Crash
At a stoplight, a small car (1200 kg) collides with a motionless large truck (3000 kg). The car comes to an
instantaneous stop; the truck slides straight ahead, coming to a stop after sliding 10 meters. The measured
coefficient of friction between the truck’s tires and the road was 0.62. How fast was the car moving at the moment
of impact?
Strategy
At first it may seem we don’t have enough information to solve this problem. Although we know the initial speed of
the truck, we don’t know the speed of the car (indeed, that’s what we’re asked to find), so we don’t know the initial
momentum of the system. Similarly, we know the final speed of the car, but not the speed of the truck immediately
after impact. The fact that the truck eventually slid to a speed of zero doesn’t help with the final momentum, since
an external friction force caused that. Nor can we calculate an impulse, since we don’t know the collision time, or
the amount of time the truck slid before stopping. A useful strategy is to impose a restriction on the analysis.
Suppose we define a system consisting of just the car and the truck. The momentum of this system isn’t conserved,
because of the friction between the truck and the road. But if we couldfind the speed of the truck the instant after
impact—before friction had any measurable effect on the truck—then we could consider the momentum of the
system to be conserved, with that restriction.
Can we find the final speed of the truck? Yes; we invoke the work-energy theorem.
408 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Solution
First, define some variables. Let:
• be the masses of the car and truck, respectively
• be the velocities of the truck before and after the collision, respectively
• Z be the velocities of the car before and after the collision, respectively
• be the kinetic energies of the truck immediately after the collision, and after the truck has stopped
sliding (so ).
• dbe the distance the truck slides after the collision before eventually coming to a stop.
Since we actually want the initial speed of the car, and since the car is not part of the work-energy calculation, let’s
start with conservation of momentum. For the car + truck system, conservation of momentum reads
Since the car’s initial velocity was zero, as was the truck’s final velocity, this simplifies to
So now we need the truck’s speed immediately after impact. Recall that
where
Also,
The work is done over the distance the truck slides, which we’ve called d . Equating:
Friction is the force on the truck that does the work to stop the sliding. With a level road, the friction force is
Since the angle between the directions of the friction force vector and the displacement dis we have
, and
(Notice that the truck’s mass divides out; evidently the mass of the truck doesn’t matter.)
Solving for the truck’s speed immediately after the collision gives
Substituting the given numbers:
Access for free at openstax.org
9.4 • Types of Collisions 409
Now we can calculate the initial speed of the car:
Significance
This is an example of the type of analysis done by investigators of major car accidents. A great deal of legal and
financial consequences depend on an accurate analysis and calculation of momentum and energy.
This collision converted some of the initial kinetic energy to other forms (presumably the deformation of the car and
truck and some heat and sound):
Change in kinetic energy =
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.8
Suppose there had been no friction (the collision happened on ice); that would make , which is obviously wrong. What is the mistake in this conclusion?
zero, and thus
Subatomic Collisions and Momentum
Conservation of momentum is crucial to our understanding of atomic and subatomic particles because much of
what we know about these particles comes from collision experiments.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, there was considerable interest in, and debate about, the structure of the
atom. It was known that atoms contain two types of electrically charged particles: negatively charged electrons and
positively charged protons. (The existence of an electrically neutral particle was suspected, but would not be
confirmed until 1932.) The question was, how were these particles arranged in the atom? Were they distributed
uniformly throughout the volume of the atom (as J.J. Thomson proposed), or arranged at the corners of regular
polygons (which was Gilbert Lewis’ model), or rings of negative charge that surround the positively charged
nucleus—rather like the planetary rings surrounding Saturn (as suggested by Hantaro Nagaoka), or something else?
The New Zealand physicist Ernest Rutherford (along with the German physicist Hans Geiger and the British physicist
Ernest Marsden) performed the crucial experiment in 1909. They bombarded a thin sheet of gold foil with a beam of
high-energy (that is, high-speed) alpha-particles (the nucleus of a helium atom). The alpha-particles collided with
the gold atoms, and their subsequent velocities were detected and analyzed, using conservation of momentum and
conservation of energy.
If the charges of the gold atoms were distributed uniformly (per Thomson), then the alpha-particles should collide
with them and nearly all would be deflected through many angles, all small; the Nagaoka model would produce a
similar result. If the atoms were arranged as regular polygons (Lewis), the alpha-particles would deflect at a
relatively small number of angles.
What actual l y happened is that nearly none of the alpha-particles were deflected. Those that were, were deflected
at large angles, some close to —those alpha-particles reversed direction completely (Figure 9.21). None of the
existing atomic models could explain this. Eventually, Rutherford developed a model of the atom that was much
closer to what we now have—again, using conservation of momentum and energy as his starting point.
410 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.21 The Thomson and Rutherford models of the atom. The Thomson model predicted that nearly all of the incident alpha-
particles would be scattered and at small angles. Rutherford and Geiger found that nearly none of the alpha particles were scattered, but
those few that were deflected did so through very large angles. The results of Rutherford’s experiments were inconsistent with the
Thomson model. Rutherford used conservation of momentum and energy to develop a new, and better model of the atom—the nuclear
model.
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express momentum as a two-dimensional vector
• Write equations for momentum conservation in component form
• Calculate momentum in two dimensions, as a vector quantity
It is far more common for collisions to occur in two dimensions; that is, the angle between the initial velocity vectors
is neither zero nor . Let’s see what complications arise from this.
The first idea we need is that momentum is a vector; like all vectors, it can be expressed as a sum of perpendicular
components (usually, though not always, an x-component and a y-component, and a z-component if necessary).
Thus, when we write down the statement of conservation of momentum for a problem, our momentum vectors can
be, and usually will be, expressed in component form.
The second idea we need comes from the fact that momentum is related to force:
Expressing both the force and the momentum in component form,
Access for free at openstax.org
9.5 • Collisions in Multiple Dimensions 411
Remember, these equations are simply Newton’s second law, in vector form and in component form. We know that
Newton’s second law is true in each direction, independently of the others. It follows therefore (via Newton’s third
law) that conservation of momentum is also true in each direction independently.
These two ideas motivate the solution to two-dimensional problems: We write down the expression for conservation
of momentum twice: once in the x-direction and once in the y-direction.
9.18
This procedure is shown graphically in Figure 9.22.
FIGURE 9.22 (a) For two-dimensional momentum problems, break the initial momentum vectors into their x- and y-components. (b) Add
the x- and y-components together separately. This gives you the x- and y-components of the final momentum, which are shown as red
dashed vectors. (c) Adding these components together gives the final momentum.
We solve each of these two component equations independently to obtain the x- and y-components of the desired
velocity vector:
412 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
(Here, m represents the total mass of the system.) Finally, combine these components using the Pythagorean
theorem,
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Conservation of Momentum in Two Dimensions
The method for solving a two-dimensional (or even three-dimensional) conservation of momentum problem is
generally the same as the method for solving a one-dimensional problem, except that you have to conserve
momentum in both (or all three) dimensions simultaneously:
1. Identify a closed system.
2. Write down the equation that represents conservation of momentum in the x-direction, and solve it for the
desired quantity. If you are calculating a vector quantity (velocity, usually), this will give you the x-component
of the vector.
3. Write down the equation that represents conservation of momentum in the y-direction, and solve. This will
give you the y-component of your vector quantity.
4. Assuming you are calculating a vector quantity, use the Pythagorean theorem to calculate its magnitude, using
the results of steps 3 and 4.
EXAMPLE 9.14
Traffic Collision
A small car of mass 1200 kg traveling east at 60 km/hr collides at an intersection with a truck of mass 3000 kg that
is traveling due north at 40 km/hr (Figure 9.23). The two vehicles are locked together. What is the velocity of the
combined wreckage?
Access for free at openstax.org
9.5 • Collisions in Multiple Dimensions 413
FIGURE 9.23 A large truck moving north is about to collide with a small car moving east. The final momentum vector has both x- and
y-components.
Strategy
First off, we need a closed system. The natural system to choose is the (car + truck), but this system is not closed;
friction from the road acts on both vehicles. We avoid this problem by restricting the question to finding the velocity
at the instant just after the collision, so that friction has not yet had any effect on the system. With that restriction,
momentum is conserved for this system.
Since there are two directions involved, we do conservation of momentum twice: once in the x-direction and once in
the y-direction.
Solution
Bef ore the collision the total momentum is
Aft er the collision, the wreckage has momentum
Since the system is closed, momentum must be conserved, so we have
We have to be careful; the two initial momenta are not parallel. We must add vectorially (Figure 9.24).
414 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.24 Graphical addition of momentum vectors. Notice that, although the car’s velocity is larger than the truck’s, its momentum is
smaller.
If we define the +x-direction to point east and the +y-direction to point north, as in the figure, then (conveniently),
Therefore, in the x-direction:
and in the y-direction:
Applying the Pythagorean theorem gives
As for its direction, using the angle shown in the figure,
This angle is east of north, or counterclockwise from the +x-direction.
Significance
As a practical matter, accident investigators usually work in the “opposite direction”; they measure the distance of
skid marks on the road (which gives the stopping distance) and use the work-energy theorem along with
conservation of momentum to determine the speeds and directions of the cars prior to the collision. We saw that
analysis in an earlier section.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.9
Suppose the initial velocities were notat right angles to each other. How would this change both the physical result
Access for free at openstax.org
9.5 • Collisions in Multiple Dimensions 415
and the mathematical analysis of the collision?
EXAMPLE 9.15
Exploding Scuba Tank
A common scuba tank is an aluminum cylinder that weighs 31.7 pounds empty (Figure 9.25). When full of
compressed air, the internal pressure is between 2500 and 3000 psi (pounds per square inch). Suppose such a tank,
which had been sitting motionless, suddenly explodes into three pieces. The first piece, weighing 10 pounds, shoots
off horizontally at 235 miles per hour; the second piece (7 pounds) shoots off at 172 miles per hour, also in the
horizontal plane, but at a angle to the first piece. What is the mass and initial velocity of the third piece? (Do all
work, and express your final answer, in SI units.)
FIGURE 9.25 A scuba tank explodes into three pieces.
Strategy
To use conservation of momentum, we need a closed system. If we define the system to be the scuba tank, this is
not a closed system, since gravity is an external force. However, the problem asks for just the initial velocity of the
third piece, so we can neglect the effect of gravity and consider the tank by itself as a closed system. Notice that, for
this system, the initial momentum vector is zero.
We choose a coordinate system where all the motion happens in the xy-plane. We then write down the equations for
conservation of momentum in each direction, thus obtaining the x- and y-components of the momentum of the third
piece, from which we obtain its magnitude (via the Pythagorean theorem) and its direction. Finally, dividing this
momentum by the mass of the third piece gives us the velocity.
Solution
First, let’s get all the conversions to SI units out of the way:
Now apply conservation of momentum in each direction.
416 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
x-direction:
y-direction:
From our chosen coordinate system, we write the x-components as
For the y-direction, we have
This gives the magnitude of :
The velocity of the third piece is therefore
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 417
The direction of its velocity vector is the same as the direction of its momentum vector:
Because is below the -axis, the actual angle is from the +x-direction.
Significance
The enormous velocities here are typical; an exploding tank of any compressed gas can easily punch through the
wall of a house and cause significant injury, or death. Fortunately, such explosions are extremely rare, on a
percentage basis.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.10
Notice that the mass of the air in the tank was neglected in the analysis and solution. How would the solution
method changed if the air was included? How large a difference do you think it would make in the final answer?
9.6 Center of Mass
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the meaning and usefulness of the concept of center of mass
• Calculate the center of mass of a given system
• Apply the center of mass concept in two and three dimensions
• Calculate the velocity and acceleration of the center of mass
We have been avoiding an important issue up to now: When we say that an object moves (more correctly,
accelerates) in a way that obeys Newton’s second law, we have been ignoring the fact that all objects are actually
made of many constituent particles. A car has an engine, steering wheel, seats, passengers; a football is leather and
rubber surrounding air; a brick is made of atoms. There are many different types of particles, and they are generally
not distributed uniformly in the object. How do we include these facts into our calculations?
Then too, an extended object might change shape as it moves, such as a water balloon or a cat falling (Figure 9.26).
This implies that the constituent particles are applying internal forces on each other, in addition to the external force
that is acting on the object as a whole. We want to be able to handle this, as well.
418 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.26 As the cat falls, its body performs complicated motions so it can land on its feet, but one point in the system moves with the
simple uniform acceleration of gravity.
The problem before us, then, is to determine what part of an extended object is obeying Newton’s second law when
an external force is applied and to determine how the motion of the object as a whole is affected by both the internal
and external forces.
Be warned: To treat this new situation correctly, we must be rigorous and completely general. We won’t make any
assumptions about the nature of the object, or of its constituent particles, or either the internal or external forces.
Thus, the arguments will be complex.
Internal and External Forces
Suppose we have an extended object of mass M , made of Ninteracting particles. Let’s label their masses as ,
where . Note that
9.19
If we apply some net external force that external force. Let:
on the object, every particle experiences some “share” or some fraction of
Notice that these fractions of the total force are not necessarily equal; indeed, they virtually never are. (They can be,
but they usually aren’t.) In general, therefore,
Next, we assume that each of the particles making up our object can interact with (apply forces on) every other
particle of the object. We won’t try to guess what kind of forces they are; but since these forces are the result of
particles of the object acting on other particles of the same object, we refer to them as internal forces ; thus:
the net internal force that the j th particle experiences from all the other particles that make up the object.
Now, the netforce, internal plus external, on the j th particle is the vector sum of these:
9.20
where again, this is for all Nparticles; .
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 419
As a result of this fractional force, the momentum of each particle gets changed:
9.21
The net force on the objectis the vector sum of these forces:
9.22
This net force changes the momentum of the object as a whole, and the net change of momentum of the object
must be the vector sum of all the individual changes of momentum of all of the particles:
9.23
Combining Equation 9.22 and Equation 9.23 gives
9.24
Let’s now think about these summations. First consider the internal forces term; remember that each is the
force on the j th particle from the other particles in the object. But by Newton’s third law, for every one of these
forces, there must be another force that has the same magnitude, but the opposite sign (points in the opposite
direction). These forces do not cancel; however, that’s not what we’re doing in the summation. Rather, we’re simply
mathematical l y adding up all the internal force vectors. That is, in general, the internal forces for any individual part
of the object won’t cancel, but when all the internal forces are added up, the internal forces must cancel in pairs. It
follows, therefore, that the sum of all the internal forces must be zero:
(This argument is subtle, but crucial; take plenty of time to completely understand it.)
For the external forces, this summation is simply the total external force that was applied to the whole object:
As a result,
9.25
This is an important result. Equation 9.25 tells us that the total change of momentum of the entire object (all N
particles) is due only to the external forces; the internal forces do not change the momentum of the object as a
whole. This is why you can’t lift yourself in the air by standing in a basket and pulling up on the handles: For the
system of you + basket, your upward pulling force is an internal force.
420 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Force and Momentum
Remember that our actual goal is to determine the equation of motion for the entire object (the entire system of
particles). To that end, let’s define:
the total momentum of the system of Nparticles (the reason for the subscript will become clear shortly)
Then we have
and therefore Equation 9.25 can be written simply as
9.26
Since this change of momentum is caused by only the net external force, we have dropped the “ext” subscript.
This is Newton’s second law, but now for the entire extended object. If this feels a bit anticlimactic, remember what
is hiding inside it: billions of particles is the vector sum of the momentum of (in principle) hundreds of thousands of billions of
, all caused by one simple net external force—a force that you can calculate.
Center of Mass
Our next task is to determine what part of the extended object, if any, is obeying Equation 9.26.
It’s tempting to take the next step; does the following equation mean anything?
9.27
If it does mean something (acceleration of what, exactly?), then we could write
and thus
which follows because the derivative of a sum is equal to the sum of the derivatives.
Now, coordinate system) as is the momentum of the j th particle. Defining the positions of the constituent particles (relative to some
, we thus have
Substituting back, we obtain
Dividing both sides by M(the total mass of the extended object) gives us
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 421
9.28
Thus, the point in the object that traces out the trajectory dictated by the applied force in Equation 9.27 is inside the
parentheses in Equation 9.28.
Looking at this calculation, notice that (inside the parentheses) we are calculating the product of each particle’s
mass with its position, adding all Nof these up, and dividing this sum by the total mass of particles we summed. This
is reminiscent of an average; inspired by this, we’ll (loosely) interpret it to be the weighted average position of the
mass of the extended object. It’s actually called the center of mass of the object. Notice that the position of the
center of mass has units of meters; that suggests a definition:
9.29
So, the point that obeys Equation 9.26 (and therefore Equation 9.27 as well) is the center of mass of the object,
which is located at the position vector .
It may surprise you to learn that there does not have to be any actual mass at the center of mass of an object. For
example, a hollow steel sphere with a vacuum inside it is spherically symmetrical (meaning its mass is uniformly
distributed about the center of the sphere); all of the sphere’s mass is out on its surface, with no mass inside. But it
can be shown that the center of mass of the sphere is at its geometric center, which seems reasonable. Thus, there
is no mass at the position of the center of mass of the sphere. (Another example is a doughnut.) The procedure to
find the center of mass is illustrated in Figure 9.27.
422 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.27 Finding the center of mass of a system of three different particles. (a) Position vectors are created for each object. (b) The
position vectors are multiplied by the mass of the corresponding object. (c) The scaled vectors from part (b) are added together. (d) The
final vector is divided by the total mass. This vector points to the center of mass of the system. Note that no mass is actually present at the
center of mass of this system.
Since , it follows that:
9.30
9.31
9.32
and thus
Therefore, you can calculate the components of the center of mass vector individually.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 423
Finally, to complete the kinematics, the instantaneous velocity of the center of mass is calculated exactly as you
might suspect:
9.33
and this, like the position, has x-, y-, and z-components.
To calculate the center of mass in actual situations, we recommend the following procedure:
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Calculating the Center of Mass
The center of mass of an object is a position vector. Thus, to calculate it, do these steps:
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Define your coordinate system. Typically, the origin is placed at the location of one of the particles. This is not
required, however.
Determine the x, y, z-coordinates of each particle that makes up the object.
Determine the mass of each particle, and sum them to obtain the total mass of the object. Note that the mass
of the object at the origin mustbe included in the total mass.
Calculate the x-, y-, and z-components of the center of mass vector, using Equation 9.30, Equation 9.31, and
Equation 9.32.
If required, use the Pythagorean theorem to determine its magnitude.
Here are two examples that will give you a feel for what the center of mass is.
EXAMPLE 9.16
Center of Mass of the Earth-Moon System
Using data from text appendix, determine how far the center of mass of the Earth-moon system is from the center of
Earth. Compare this distance to the radius of Earth, and comment on the result. Ignore the other objects in the solar
system.
Strategy
We get the masses and separation distance of the Earth and moon, impose a coordinate system, and use Equation
9.29 with just objects. We use a subscript “e” to refer to Earth, and subscript “m” to refer to the moon.
Solution
becomes
Define the origin of the coordinate system as the center of Earth. Then, with just two objects, Equation 9.29
From Appendix D,
We defined the center of Earth as the origin, so . Inserting these into the equation for Rgives
424 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Significance
The radius of Earth is of mass is shown (not to scale).
, so the center of mass of the Earth-moon system is (6.37 − 4.64)
(roughly 1080 miles) below the surface of Earth. The location of the center
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.11
Suppose we included the sun in the system. Approximately where would the center of mass of the Earth-moon-sun
system be located? (Feel free to actually calculate it.)
EXAMPLE 9.17
Center of Mass of a Salt Crystal
Figure 9.28 shows a single crystal of sodium chloride—ordinary table salt. The sodium and chloride ions form a
single unit, NaCl. When multiple NaCl units group together, they form a cubic lattice. The smallest possible cube
(called the unit cel l ) consists of four sodium ions and four chloride ions, alternating. The length of one edge of this
cube (i.e., the bond length) is . Find the location of the center of mass of the unit cell. Specify it
either by its coordinates , or by and two angles.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 425
FIGURE 9.28 A drawing of a sodium chloride (NaCl) crystal.
Strategy
We can look up all the ion masses. If we impose a coordinate system on the unit cell, this will give us the positions of
the ions. We can then apply Equation 9.30, Equation 9.31, and Equation 9.32 (along with the Pythagorean theorem).
Solution
Define the origin to be at the location of the chloride ion at the bottom left of the unit cell. Figure 9.29 shows the
coordinate system.
FIGURE 9.29 A single unit cell of a NaCl crystal.
There are eight ions in this crystal, so N= 8:
The mass of each of the chloride ions is
426 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
so we have
For the sodium ions,
The total mass of the unit cell is therefore
From the geometry, the locations are
Substituting:
(you could argue that this must be true, by symmetry,
Similar calculations give but it’s a good idea to check).
Significance
Although this is a great exercise to determine the center of mass given a Chloride ion at the origin, in fact the origin
could be chosen at any location. Therefore, there is no meaningful application of the center of mass of a unit cell
beyond as an exercise.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.12
Suppose you have a macroscopic salt crystal (that is, a crystal that is large enough to be visible with your unaided
eye). It is made up of a hug e number of unit cells. Is the center of mass of this crystal necessarily at the geometric
center of the crystal?
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 427
Two crucial concepts come out of these examples:
1. 2. As with all problems, you must define your coordinate system and origin. For center-of-mass calculations, it
often makes sense to choose your origin to be located at one of the masses of your system. That choice
automatically defines its distance in Equation 9.29 to be zero. However, you must still include the mass of the
object at your origin in your calculation of M , the total mass Equation 9.19. In the Earth-moon system
example, this means including the mass of Earth. If you hadn’t, you’d have ended up with the center of mass
of the system being at the center of the moon, which is clearly wrong.
In the second example (the salt crystal), notice that there is no mass at all at the location of the center of
mass. This is an example of what we stated above, that there does not have to be any actual mass at the
center of mass of an object.
Center of Mass of Continuous Objects
If the object in question has its mass distributed uniformly in space, rather than as a collection of discrete particles,
then , and the summation becomes an integral:
9.34
In this context, r is a characteristic dimension of the object (the radius of a sphere, the length of a long rod). To
generate an integrand that can actually be calculated, you need to express the differential mass element dm as a
function of the mass density of the continuous object, and the dimension r. An example will clarify this.
EXAMPLE 9.18
CM of a Uniform Thin Hoop
Find the center of mass of a uniform thin hoop (or ring) of mass Mand radius r.
Strategy
First, the hoop’s symmetry suggests the center of mass should be at its geometric center. If we define our
coordinate system such that the origin is located at the center of the hoop, the integral should evaluate to zero.
We replace dm with an expression involving the density of the hoop and the radius of the hoop. We then have an
expression we can actually integrate. Since the hoop is described as “thin,” we treat it as a one-dimensional object,
neglecting the thickness of the hoop. Therefore, its density is expressed as the number of kilograms of material per
meter. Such a density is called a linear mass density, and is given the symbol ; this is the Greek letter “lambda,
”
which is the equivalent of the English letter “l” (for “linear”).
Since the hoop is described as uniform, this means that the linear mass density expression for the differential mass element dm, we multiply integrate (with appropriate limits for the definite integral).
is constant. Thus, to get our
by a differential length of the hoop, substitute, and
Solution
First, define our coordinate system and the relevant variables (Figure 9.30).
428 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE 9.30 Finding the center of mass of a uniform hoop. We express the coordinates of a differential piece of the hoop, and then
integrate around the hoop.
The center of mass is calculated with Equation 9.34:
We have to determine the limits of integration a and b . Expressing in component form gives us
In the diagram, we highlighted a piece of the hoop that is of differential length ds; it therefore has a differential mass
. Substituting:
However, the arc length ds subtends a differential angle , so we have
and thus
One more step: Since hoop:
is the linear mass density, it is computed by dividing the total mass by the length of the
giving us
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 429
Notice that the variable of integration is now the angle circular hoop) are , so and y-components of and . The final integral expression is
. This tells us that the limits of integration (around the
. Also, for convenience, we separate the integral into the x-
as expected.
Center of Mass and Conservation of Momentum
How does all this connect to conservation of momentum?
Suppose you have Nobjects with masses mass of the objects is
and initial velocities . The center of
Its velocity is
9.35
and thus the initial momentum of the center of mass is
After these masses move and interact with each other, the momentum of the center of mass is
But conservation of momentum tells us that the right-hand side of both equations must be equal, which says
9.36
This result implies that conservation of momentum is expressed in terms of the center of mass of the system. Notice
that as an object moves through space with no net external force acting on it, an individual particle of the object may
accelerate in various directions, with various magnitudes, depending on the net internal force acting on that object
at any time. (Remember, it is only the vector sum of all the internal forces that vanishes, not the internal force on a
single particle.) Thus, such a particle’s momentum will not be constant—but the momentum of the entire extended
object will be, in accord with Equation 9.36.
430 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Equation 9.36 implies another important result: Since Mrepresents the mass of the entire system of particles, it is
necessarily constant. (If it isn’t, we don’t have a closed system, so we can’t expect the system’s momentum to be
conserved.) As a result, Equation 9.36 implies that, for a closed system,
9.37
That is to say, in the absence of an ext ernal f orce, the velocity of the cent er of mass never chang es.
You might be tempted to shrug and say, “Well yes, that’s just Newton’s first law,” but remember that Newton’s first
law discusses the constant velocity of a particle, whereas Equation 9.37 applies to the center of mass of a (possibly
vast) collection of interacting particles, and that there may not be any particle at the center of mass at all! So, this
really is a remarkable result.
EXAMPLE 9.19
Fireworks Display
When a fireworks rocket explodes, thousands of glowing fragments fly outward in all directions, and fall to Earth in
an elegant and beautiful display (Figure 9.31). Describe what happens, in terms of conservation of momentum and
center of mass.
FIGURE 9.31 These exploding fireworks are a vivid example of conservation of momentum and the motion of the center of mass.
The picture shows radial symmetry about the central points of the explosions; this suggests the idea of center of
mass. We can also see the parabolic motion of the glowing particles; this brings to mind projectile motion ideas.
Solution
Initially, the fireworks rocket is launched and flies more or less straight upward; this is the cause of the more-or-
less-straight, white trail going high into the sky below the explosion in the upper-right of the picture (the yellow
explosion). This trail is not parabolic because the explosive shell, during its launch phase, is actually a rocket; the
impulse applied to it by the ejection of the burning fuel applies a force on the shell during the rise-time interval.
(This is a phenomenon we will study in the next section.) The shell has multiple forces on it; thus, it is not in free-fall
prior to the explosion.
At the instant of the explosion, the thousands of glowing fragments fly outward in a radially symmetrical pattern.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.6 • Center of Mass 431
The symmetry of the explosion is the result of all the internal forces summing to zero for every
internal force, there is another that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
However, as we learned above, these internal forces cannot change the momentum of the center of mass of the
(now exploded) shell. Since the rocket force has now vanished, the center of mass of the shell is now a projectile
(the only force on it is gravity), so its trajectory does become parabolic. The two red explosions on the left show the
path of their centers of mass at a slightly longer time after explosion compared to the yellow explosion on the upper
right.
In fact, if you look carefully at all three explosions, you can see that the glowing trails are not truly radially
symmetric; rather, they are somewhat denser on one side than the other. Specifically, the yellow explosion and the
lower middle explosion are slightly denser on their right sides, and the upper-left explosion is denser on its left side.
This is because of the momentum of their centers of mass; the differing trail densities are due to the momentum
each piece of the shell had at the moment of its explosion. The fragment for the explosion on the upper left of the
picture had a momentum that pointed upward and to the left; the middle fragment’s momentum pointed upward
and slightly to the right; and the right-side explosion clearly upward and to the right (as evidenced by the white
rocket exhaust trail visible below the yellow explosion).
Finally, each fragment is a projectile on its own, thus tracing out thousands of glowing parabolas.
Significance
In the discussion above, we said, “…the center of mass of the shell is now a projectile (the only force on it is
gravity)….” This is not quite accurate, for there may not be any mass at all at the center of mass; in which case, there
could not be a force acting on it. This is actually just verbal shorthand for describing the fact that the gravitational
forces on all the particles act so that the center of mass changes position exactly as if all the mass of the shell were
always located at the position of the center of mass.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.13
How would the firework display change in deep space, far away from any source of gravity?
You may sometimes hear someone describe an explosion by saying something like, “the fragments of the exploded
object always move in a way that makes sure that the center of mass continues to move on its original trajectory.
”
This makes it sound as if the process is somewhat magical: how can it be that, in ever y explosion, it al wa ys works
out that the fragments move in just the right way so that the center of mass’ motion is unchanged? Phrased this way,
it would be hard to believe no explosion ever does anything differently.
The explanation of this apparently astonishing coincidence is: We defined the center of mass precisely so this is
exactly what we would get. Recall that first we defined the momentum of the system:
We then concluded that the net external force on the system (if any) changed this momentum:
and then—and here’s the point—we defined an acceleration that would obey Newton’s second law. That is, we
demanded that we should be able to write
which requires that
432 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
where the quantity inside the parentheses is the center of mass of our system. So, it’s not astonishing that the
center of mass obeys Newton’s second law; we defined it so that it would.
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the application of conservation of momentum when the mass changes with time, as well as the
velocity
• Calculate the speed of a rocket in empty space, at some time, given initial conditions
• Calculate the speed of a rocket in Earth’s gravity field, at some time, given initial conditions
Now we deal with the case where the mass of an object is changing. We analyze the motion of a rocket, which
changes its velocity (and hence its momentum) by ejecting burned fuel gases, thus causing it to accelerate in the
opposite direction of the velocity of the ejected fuel (see Figure 9.32). Specifically: A fully fueled rocket ship in deep
space has a total mass (this mass includes the initial mass of the fuel). At some moment in time, the rocket has a
velocity and mass m; this mass is a combination of the mass of the empty rocket and the mass of the remaining
unburned fuel it contains. (We refer to m as the “instantaneous mass” and as the “instantaneous velocity.”) The
rocket accelerates by burning the fuel it carries and ejecting the burned exhaust gases. If the burn rate of the fuel is
constant, and the velocity at which the exhaust is ejected is also constant, what is the change of velocity of the
rocket as a result of burning all of its fuel?
FIGURE 9.32 The space shuttle had a number of reusable parts. Solid fuel boosters on either side were recovered and refueled after each
flight, and the entire orbiter returned to Earth for use in subsequent flights. The large liquid fuel tank was expended. The space shuttle was
a complex assemblage of technologies, employing both solid and liquid fuel, and pioneering ceramic tiles as reentry heat shields. As a
result, it permitted multiple launches as opposed to single-use rockets. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Physical Analysis
Here’s a description of what happens, so that you get a feel for the physics involved.
Access for free at openstax.org
9.7 • Rocket Propulsion 433
• As the rocket engines operate, they are continuously ejecting burned fuel gases, which have both mass and
velocity, and therefore some momentum. By conservation of momentum, the rocket’s momentum changes by
this same amount (with the opposite sign). We will assume the burned fuel is being ejected at a constant rate,
which means the rate of change of the rocket’s momentum is also constant. By Equation 9.9, this represents a
constant force on the rocket.
• However, as time goes on, the mass of the rocket (which includes the mass of the remaining fuel) continuously
decreases. Thus, even though the force on the rocket is constant, the resulting acceleration is not; it is
continuously increasing.
• So, the total change of the rocket’s velocity will depend on the amount of mass of fuel that is burned, and that
dependence is not linear.
The problem has the mass and velocity of the rocket changing; also, the total mass of ejected gases is changing. If
we define our system to be the rocket + fuel, then this is a closed system (since the rocket is in deep space, there
are no external forces acting on this system); as a result, momentum is conserved for this system. Thus, we can
apply conservation of momentum to answer the question (Figure 9.33).
FIGURE 9.33 The rocket accelerates to the right due to the expulsion of some of its fuel mass to the left. Conservation of momentum
enables us to determine the resulting change of velocity. The mass m is the instantaneous total mass of the rocket (i.e., mass of rocket body
plus mass of fuel at that point in time). (credit: modification of work by NASA/Bill Ingalls)
At the same moment that the total instantaneous rocket mass is m (i.e., m is the mass of the rocket body plus the
mass of the fuel at that point in time), we define the rocket’s instantaneous velocity to be (in the
+x-direction); this velocity is measured relative to an inertial reference system (the Earth, for example). Thus, the
initial momentum of the system is
; note
The rocket’s engines are burning fuel at a constant rate and ejecting the exhaust gases in the −x-direction. During an
infinitesimal time interval dt , the engines eject a (positive) infinitesimal mass of gas at velocity that although the rocket velocity is measured with respect to Earth, the exhaust gas velocity is measured with
respect to the (moving) rocket. Measured with respect to the Earth, therefore, the exhaust gas has velocity .
As a consequence of the ejection of the fuel gas, the rocket’s mass decreases by , and its velocity increases by
. Therefore, including both the change for the rocket and the change for the exhaust gas, the final momentum of
the system is
Since all vectors are in the x-direction, we drop the vector notation. Applying conservation of momentum, we obtain
434 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Now, and dv are each very small; thus, their product two terms in this expression. We neglect this term, therefore, and obtain:
is very, very small, much smaller than the other
Our next step is to remember that, since represent a decrease of mass of the rocket:
represents an increase in the mass of ejected gases, it must also
Replacing this, we have
or
Integrating from the initial mass m0 to the final mass m of the rocket gives us the result we are after:
and thus our final answer is
9.38
This result is called the rocket equation. It was originally derived by the Russian rocket scientist Konstantin
Tsiolkovsky in 1897. It gives us the change of velocity that the rocket obtains from burning a mass of fuel that
decreases the total rocket mass from down to m. As expected, the relationship between and the change of
mass of the rocket is nonlinear.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rocket Propulsion
In rocket problems, the most common questions are finding the change of velocity due to burning some amount of
fuel for some amount of time; or to determine the acceleration that results from burning fuel.
1. 2. To determine the change of velocity, use the rocket equation Equation 9.38.
To determine the acceleration, determine the force by using the impulse-momentum theorem, using the
rocket equation to determine the change of velocity.
EXAMPLE 9.20
Thrust on a Spacecraft
A spacecraft is moving in gravity-free space along a straight path when its pilot decides to accelerate forward. He
turns on the thrusters, and burned fuel is ejected at a constant rate of , at a speed (relative to the
rocket) of . The initial mass of the spacecraft and its unburned fuel is , and the
Access for free at openstax.org
9.7 • Rocket Propulsion 435
thrusters are on for 30 s.
a. b. c. What is the thrust (the force applied to the rocket by the ejected fuel) on the spacecraft?
What is the spacecraft’s acceleration as a function of time?
What are the spacecraft’s accelerations at t= 0, 15, 30, and 35 s?
Strategy
a. b. c. The force on the spacecraft is equal to the rate of change of the momentum of the fuel.
Knowing the force from part (a), we can use Newton’s second law to calculate the consequent acceleration.
The key here is that, although the force applied to the spacecraft is constant (the fuel is being ejected at a
constant rate), the mass of the spacecraft isn’t; thus, the acceleration caused by the force won’t be constant.
We expect to get a function a(t ), therefore.
We’ll use the function we obtain in part (b), and just substitute the numbers given. Important: We expect that
the acceleration will get larger as time goes on, since the mass being accelerated is continuously decreasing
(fuel is being ejected from the rocket).
Solution
a. The momentum of the ejected fuel gas is
The ejection velocity is constant, and therefore the force is
Now, Substituting, we get
is the rate of change of the mass of the fuel; the problem states that this is .
b. Above, we defined m to be the combined mass of the empty rocket plus however much unburned fuel it
contained: . From Newton’s second law,
The force is constant and the empty rocket mass uniform rate; specifically:
is constant, but the fuel mass is decreasing at a
This gives us
Notice that, as expected, the acceleration is a function of time. Substituting the given numbers:
c. At :
At .
436 9 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
At .
Acceleration is increasing, as we expected.
At (and at any time after ), the acceleration is thus no external forces are acting on the spacecraft.
since the thrusters stopped working and
Significance
Notice that the acceleration is not constant; as a result, any dynamical quantities must be calculated either using
integrals, or (more easily) conservation of total energy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 9.14
What is the physical difference (or relationship) between and in this example?
Rocket in a Gravitational Field
Let’s now analyze the velocity change of the rocket during the launch phase, from the surface of Earth. To keep the
math manageable, we’ll restrict our attention to distances for which the acceleration caused by gravity can be
treated as a constant g.
The analysis is similar, except that now there is an external force of applies an impulse , which is equal to the change of momentum. This gives us
acting on our system. This force
and so
where we have again neglected the term and dropped the vector notation. Next we replace with :
Dividing through by m gives
and integrating, we have
9.39
Unsurprisingly, the rocket’s velocity is affected by the (constant) acceleration of gravity.
Remember that is the burn time of the fuel. Now, in the absence of gravity, Equation 9.38 implies that it makes
no difference how much time it takes to burn the entire mass of fuel; the change of velocity does not depend on .
However, in the presence of gravity, it matters a lot. The −g term in Equation 9.39 tells us that the long er the burn
time is, the smal ler the rocket’s change of velocity will be. This is the reason that the launch of a rocket is so
spectacular at the first moment of liftoff: It’s essential to burn the fuel as quickly as possible, to get as large a as
possible.
Access for free at openstax.org
9 • Chapter Review 437
Chapter Review
Key Terms
center of mass weighted average position of the
mass
closed system system for which the mass is constant
and the net external force on the system is zero
elastic collision that conserves kinetic energy
explosion single object breaks up into multiple
objects; kinetic energy is not conserved in
explosions
external force force applied to an extended object
that changes the momentum of the extended object
as a whole
impulse effect of applying a force on a system for a
time interval; this time interval is usually small, but
does not have to be
impulse-momentum theorem change of momentum
of a system is equal to the impulse applied to the
system
inelastic collision that does not conserve kinetic
energy
internal force force that the simple particles that
make up an extended object exert on each other.
Internal forces can be attractive or repulsive
Key Equations
Definition of momentum
Impulse
Impulse-momentum theorem
Average force from momentum
Instantaneous force from momentum
(Newton’s second law)
Conservation of momentum
Law of Conservation of Momentum total momentum
of a closed system cannot change
linear mass density , expressed as the number of
kilograms of material per meter
momentum measure of the quantity of motion that
an object has; it takes into account both how fast
the object is moving, and its mass; specifically, it is
the product of mass and velocity; it is a vector
quantity
perfectly inelastic collision after which all objects
are motionless, the final kinetic energy is zero, and
the loss of kinetic energy is a maximum
rocket equation derived by the Soviet physicist
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky in 1897, it gives us the
change of velocity that the rocket obtains from
burning a mass of fuel that decreases the total
rocket mass from down to m
system object or collection of objects whose motion
is currently under investigation; however, your
system is defined at the start of the problem, you
must keep that definition for the entire problem
Generalized conservation of momentum
Conservation of momentum in two dimensions
External forces
Newton’s second law for an extended object
Acceleration of the center of mass
Position of the center of mass for a system
of particles
438 9 • Chapter Review
Velocity of the center of mass
Position of the center of mass of a
continuous object
Rocket equation
Summary
9.1 Linear Momentum
• The motion of an object depends on its mass as
well as its velocity. Momentum is a concept that
describes this. It is a useful and powerful
concept, both computationally and theoretically.
The SI unit for momentum is kg m/s.
9.2 Impulse and Collisions
• When a force is applied on an object for some
amount of time, the object experiences an
impulse.
• This impulse is equal to the object’s change of
momentum.
• Newton’s second law in terms of momentum
states that the net force applied to a system
equals the rate of change of the momentum that
the force causes.
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
• The law of conservation of momentum says that
the momentum of a closed system is constant in
time (conserved).
• A closed (or isolated) system is defined to be one
for which the mass remains constant, and the net
external force is zero.
• The total momentum of a system is conserved
onl y when the system is closed.
9.4 Types of Collisions
• An elastic collision is one that conserves kinetic
energy.
• An inelastic collision does not conserve kinetic
energy.
• Momentum is conserved regardless of whether
or not kinetic energy is conserved.
• Analysis of kinetic energy changes and
conservation of momentum together allow the
final velocities to be calculated in terms of initial
Conceptual Questions
9.1 Linear Momentum
1. An object that has a small mass and an object
that has a large mass have the same
Access for free at openstax.org
velocities and masses in one-dimensional, two-
body collisions.
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
• The approach to two-dimensional collisions is to
choose a convenient coordinate system and
break the motion into components along
perpendicular axes.
• Momentum is conserved in both directions
simultaneously and independently.
• The Pythagorean theorem gives the magnitude of
the momentum vector using the x- and
y-components, calculated using conservation of
momentum in each direction.
9.6 Center of Mass
• An extended object (made up of many objects)
has a defined position vector called the center of
mass.
• The center of mass can be thought of, loosely, as
the average location of the total mass of the
object.
• The center of mass of an object traces out the
trajectory dictated by Newton’s second law, due
to the net external force.
• The internal forces within an extended object
cannot alter the momentum of the extended
object as a whole.
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
• A rocket is an example of conservation of
momentum where the mass of the system is not
constant, since the rocket ejects fuel to provide
thrust.
• The rocket equation gives us the change of
velocity that the rocket obtains from burning a
mass of fuel that decreases the total rocket
mass.
momentum. Which object has the largest kinetic
energy?
An object that has a small mass and an object
2. 
3. 4. 5. 6. that has a large mass have the same kinetic
energy. Which mass has the largest momentum?
9.2 Impulse and Collisions
Is it possible for a small force to produce a larger
impulse on a given object than a large force?
Explain.
Why is a 10-m fall onto concrete far more
dangerous than a 10-m fall onto water?
What external force is responsible for changing
the momentum of a car moving along a
horizontal road?
A piece of putty and a tennis ball with the same
mass are thrown against a wall with the same
velocity. Which object experiences a greater
force from the wall or are the forces equal?
Explain.
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Under what circumstances is momentum
conserved?
Can momentum be conserved for a system if
there are external forces acting on the system?
If so, under what conditions? If not, why not?
Explain in terms of momentum and Newton’s
laws how a car’s air resistance is due in part to
the fact that it pushes air in its direction of
motion.
Can objects in a system have momentum while
the momentum of the system is zero? Explain
your answer.
A sprinter accelerates out of the starting blocks.
Can you consider him as a closed system?
Problems
9.1 Linear Momentum
18. An elephant and a hunter are having a confrontation.
a. Calculate the momentum of the 2000.0-kg
elephant charging the hunter at a speed of
9 • Chapter Review 439
Explain.
12. A rocket in deep space (zero gravity) accelerates
by firing hot gas out of its thrusters. Does the
rocket constitute a closed system? Explain.
9.4 Types of Collisions
13. Two objects of equal mass are moving with
equal and opposite velocities when they collide.
Can all the kinetic energy be lost in the collision?
14. Describe a system for which momentum is
conserved but mechanical energy is not. Now
the reverse: Describe a system for which kinetic
energy is conserved but momentum is not.
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
15. Momentum for a system can be conserved in
one direction while not being conserved in
another. What is the angle between the
directions? Give an example.
9.6 Center of Mass
16. Suppose a fireworks shell explodes, breaking
into three large pieces for which air resistance is
negligible. How does the explosion affect the
motion of the center of mass? How would it be
affected if the pieces experienced significantly
more air resistance than the intact shell?
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
17. It is possible for the velocity of a rocket to be
greater than the exhaust velocity of the gases it
ejects. When that is the case, the gas velocity
and gas momentum are in the same direction as
that of the rocket. How is the rocket still able to
obtain thrust by ejecting the gases?
b. c. 7.50 m/s.
Calculate the ratio of the elephant’s
momentum to the momentum of a 0.0400-kg
tranquilizer dart fired at a speed of 600 m/s.
What is the momentum of the 90.0-kg hunter
running at 7.40 m/s after missing the
elephant?
A skater of mass 40 kg is carrying a box of mass
5 kg. The skater has a speed of 5 m/s with
respect to the floor and is gliding without any
friction on a smooth surface.
a. Find the momentum of the box with
respect to the floor.
19. 
440 9 • Chapter Review
b. Find the momentum of the box with
respect to the floor after she puts the box
down on the frictionless skating surface.
20. A car of mass 2000 kg is moving with a constant
velocity of 10 m/s due east. What is the
momentum of the car?
21. The mass of Earth is radius is an average of and its orbital
. Calculate
the magnitude of its linear momentum at the
location in the diagram.
22. 23. If a rainstorm drops 1 cm of rain over an area of
10 km2 in the period of 1 hour, what is the
momentum of the rain that falls in one second?
Assume the terminal velocity of a raindrop is 10
m/s.
What is the average momentum of an avalanche
that moves a 40-cm-thick layer of snow over an
area of 100 m by 500 m over a distance of 1 km
down a hill in 5.5 s? Assume a density of 350
kg/m3 for the snow.
24. What is the average momentum of a 70.0-kg
sprinter who runs the 100-m dash in 9.65 s?
9.2 Impulse and Collisions
25. A 75.0-kg person is riding in a car moving at 20.0
m/s when the car runs into a bridge abutment (see
the following figure).
Access for free at openstax.org
26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. a. b. Calculate the average force on the person if he
is stopped by a padded dashboard that
compresses an average of 1.00 cm.
Calculate the average force on the person if he
is stopped by an air bag that compresses an
average of 15.0 cm.
One hazard of space travel is debris left by
previous missions. There are several thousand
objects orbiting Earth that are large enough to
be detected by radar, but there are far greater
numbers of very small objects, such as flakes of
paint. Calculate the force exerted by a 0.100-mg
chip of paint that strikes a spacecraft window at
a relative speed of , given the
collision lasts .
A cruise ship with a mass of strikes a
pier at a speed of 0.750 m/s. It comes to rest after
traveling 6.00 m, damaging the ship, the pier, and
the tugboat captain’s finances. Calculate the
average force exerted on the pier using the concept
of impulse. (Hint : First calculate the time it took to
bring the ship to rest, assuming a constant force.)
Calculate the final speed of a 110-kg rugby
player who is initially running at 8.00 m/s but
collides head-on with a padded goalpost and
experiences a backward force of
for .
Water from a fire hose is directed horizontally
against a wall at a rate of 50.0 kg/s and a speed
of 42.0 m/s. Calculate the force exerted on the
wall, assuming the water’s horizontal
momentum is reduced to zero.
A 0.450-kg hammer is moving horizontally at
7.00 m/s when it strikes a nail and comes to rest
after driving the nail 1.00 cm into a board.
Assume constant acceleration of the hammer-
nail pair.
a. Calculate the duration of the impact.
b. What was the average force exerted on the
nail?
What is the momentum (as a function of time) of
a 5.0-kg particle moving with a velocity
? What is the net
32. force acting on this particle?
The x-component of a force on a 46-g golf ball by a
7-iron versus time is plotted in the following figure:
33. a. b. Find the x-component of the impulse during
the intervals
i. [0, 50 ms], and
ii. [50 ms, 100 ms]
Find the change in the x-component of the
momentum during the intervals
iii. [0, 50 ms], and
iv. [50 ms, 100 ms]
A hockey puck of mass 150 g is sliding due east
on a frictionless table with a speed of 10 m/s.
Suddenly, a constant force of magnitude 5 N and
direction due north is applied to the puck for 1.5
s. Find the north and east components of the
momentum at the end of the 1.5-s interval.
34. A ball of mass 250 g is thrown with an initial
velocity of 25 m/s at an angle of with the
horizontal direction. Ignore air resistance. What
is the momentum of the ball after 0.2 s? (Do this
problem by finding the components of the
momentum first, and then constructing the
magnitude and direction of the momentum
vector from the components.)
9.3 Conservation of Linear Momentum
35. Train cars are coupled together by being bumped
36. 37. 9 • Chapter Review 441
into one another. Suppose two loaded train cars are
moving toward one another, the first having a mass
of and a velocity of , and
the second having a mass of and a
velocity of . What is their final velocity?
Two identical pucks collide elastically on an air
hockey table. Puck 1 was originally at rest; puck 2
has an incoming speed of 6.00 m/s and scatters at
an angle of with respect to its incoming
direction. What is the velocity (magnitude and
direction) of puck 1 after the collision?
The figure below shows a bullet of mass 200 g
traveling horizontally towards the east with
speed 400 m/s, which strikes a block of mass
1.5 kg that is initially at rest on a frictionless
table.
After striking the block, the bullet is embedded
in the block and the block and the bullet move
together as one unit.
a. What is the magnitude and direction of the
velocity of the block/bullet combination
immediately after the impact?
b. What is the magnitude and direction of the
impulse by the block on the bullet?
c. What is the magnitude and direction of the
442 9 • Chapter Review
d. 38. 39. 40. 41. impulse from the bullet on the block?
If it took 3 ms for the bullet to change the
speed from 400 m/s to the final speed
after impact, what is the average force
between the block and the bullet during
this time?
A 20-kg child is coasting at 3.3 m/s over flat
ground in a 4.0-kg wagon.
a. If the child drops a 1-kg ball out the back
of the wagon, what is the final speed of the
child and wagon?
b. If the child drops a 1-kg ball out the back
of the wagon so that the ball is at rest
relative to the ground, what is the final
speed of the child and wagon?
A 4.5 kg puffer fish expands to 40% of its mass
by taking in water. When the puffer fish is
threatened, it releases the water toward the
threat to move quickly forward. What is the ratio
of the speed of the puffer fish forward to the
speed of the expelled water backwards?
Explain why a cannon recoils when it fires a
shell.
Two figure skaters are coasting in the same
direction, with the leading skater moving at 5.5
m/s and the trailing skating moving at 6.2 m/s.
When the trailing skater catches up with the
leading skater, he picks her up without applying
any horizontal forces on his skates. If the trailing
skater is 50% heavier than the 50-kg leading
skater, what is their speed after he picks her up?
A 2000-kg railway freight car coasts at 4.4 m/s
underneath a grain terminal, which dumps grain
directly down into the freight car. If the speed of
the loaded freight car must not go below 3.0 m/
s, what is the maximum mass of grain that it can
accept?
9.4 Types of Collisions
43. A 5.50-kg bowling ball moving at 9.00 m/s
collides with a 0.850-kg bowling pin, which is
scattered at an angle of 15.8° to the initial
direction of the bowling ball and with a speed of
15.0 m/s.
a. Calculate the final velocity (magnitude and
direction) of the bowling ball.
b. Is the collision elastic?
Ernest Rutherford (the first New Zealander to be
awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry)
42. 44. Access for free at openstax.org
45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. demonstrated that nuclei were very small and dense
by scattering helium-4 nuclei from gold-197 nuclei.
The energy of the incoming helium nucleus was
, and the masses of the helium and
gold nuclei were and
, respectively (note that their mass
ratio is 4 to 197).
a. If a helium nucleus scatters to an angle of
during an elastic collision with a gold nucleus,
calculate the helium nucleus’s final speed and the
final velocity (magnitude and direction) of the gold
nucleus.
b. What is the final kinetic energy of the helium
nucleus?
A 90.0-kg ice hockey player hits a 0.150-kg
puck, giving the puck a velocity of 45.0 m/s. If
both are initially at rest and if the ice is
frictionless, how far does the player recoil in the
time it takes the puck to reach the goal 15.0 m
away?
A 100-g firecracker is launched vertically into
the air and explodes into two pieces at the peak
of its trajectory. If a 72-g piece is projected
horizontally to the left at 20 m/s, what is the
speed and direction of the other piece?
In an elastic collision, a 400-kg bumper car
collides directly from behind with a second,
identical bumper car that is traveling in the same
direction. The initial speed of the leading
bumper car is 5.60 m/s and that of the trailing
car is 6.00 m/s. Assuming that the mass of the
drivers is much, much less than that of the
bumper cars, what are their final speeds?
Repeat the preceding problem if the mass of the
leading bumper car is 30.0% greater than that of
the trailing bumper car.
An alpha particle (4He) undergoes an elastic
collision with a stationary uranium nucleus
(235U). What percent of the kinetic energy of the
alpha particle is transferred to the uranium
nucleus? Assume the collision is one-
dimensional.
You are standing on a very slippery icy surface
51. 52. and throw a 1-kg football horizontally at a speed
of 6.7 m/s. What is your velocity when you
release the football? Assume your mass is 65 kg.
A 35-kg child rides a relatively massless sled
down a hill and then coasts along the flat section
at the bottom, where a second 35-kg child
jumps on the sled as it passes by her. If the
speed of the sled is 3.5 m/s before the second
child jumps on, what is its speed after she jumps
on?
A boy sleds down a hill and onto a frictionless
ice-covered lake at 10.0 m/s. In the middle of
the lake is a 1000-kg boulder. When the sled
crashes into the boulder, he is propelled
backwards from the boulder. The collision is an
elastic collision. If the boy’s mass is 40.0 kg and
the sled’s mass is 2.50 kg, what is the speed of
the sled and the boulder after the collision?
9.5 Collisions in Multiple Dimensions
53. A 0.90-kg falcon is diving at 28.0 m/s at a downward
angle of . It catches a 0.325-kg pigeon from
behind in midair. What is their combined velocity
after impact if the pigeon’s initial velocity was 7.00
m/s directed horizontally? Note that is a unit
vector pointing in the direction in which the falcon is
initially flying.
54. 55. FIGURE 9.34 (credit “falcon”: modification of work by “USFWS
Mountain-Prairie”/Flickr; credit “pigeon”: modification of work
by Jacob Spinks)
A billiard ball, labeled 1, moving horizontally
strikes another billiard ball, labeled 2, at rest.
Before impact, ball 1 was moving at a speed of
3.00 m/s, and after impact it is moving at 0.50
m/s at 50° from the original direction. If the two
balls have equal masses of 300 g, what is the
velocity of the ball 2 after the impact?
A projectile of mass 2.0 kg is fired in the air at an
angle of 40.0 to the horizon at a speed of 50.0 m/s.
At the highest point in its flight, the projectile breaks
into three parts of mass 1.0 kg, 0.7 kg, and 0.3 kg.
9 • Chapter Review 443
The 1.0-kg part falls straight down after breakup
with an initial speed of 10.0 m/s, the 0.7-kg part
moves in the original forward direction, and the
0.3-kg part goes straight up.
a. b. c. Find the speeds of the 0.3-kg and 0.7-kg
pieces immediately after the break-up.
How high from the break-up point does the
0.3-kg piece go before coming to rest?
Where does the 0.7-kg piece land relative to
where it was fired from?
56. Two asteroids collide and stick together. The
first asteroid has mass of and is
initially moving at 770 m/s. The second asteroid
has mass of and is moving at 1020
m/s. Their initial velocities made an angle of 20°
with respect to each other. What is the final
speed and direction with respect to the velocity
of the first asteroid?
57. A 200-kg rocket in deep space moves with a
velocity of . Suddenly,
it explodes into three pieces, with the first (78
kg) moving at and
the second (56 kg) moving at
. Find the velocity of
the third piece.
58. A proton traveling at scatters
elastically from an initially stationary alpha
particle and is deflected at an angle of 85° with
respect to its initial velocity. Given that the alpha
particle has four times the mass of the proton,
what percent of its initial kinetic energy does the
proton retain after the collision?
59. Three 70-kg deer are standing on a flat 200-kg
rock that is on an ice-covered pond. A gunshot
goes off and the deer scatter, with deer A
running at , deer B
60. 61. 444 9 • Chapter Review
running at , and deer C
running at . What is
the velocity of the rock on which they were
standing?
A family is skating. The father (75 kg) skates at
8.2 m/s and collides and sticks to the mother
(50 kg), who was initially moving at 3.3 m/s and
at 45° with respect to the father’s velocity. The
pair then collides with their daughter (30 kg),
who was stationary, and the three slide off
together. What is their final velocity?
An oxygen atom (mass 16 u) moving at 733 m/s
at 15.0° with respect to the direction collides
and sticks to an oxygen molecule (mass 32 u)
moving at 528 m/s at 128° with respect to the
direction. The two stick together to form ozone.
What is the final velocity of the ozone molecule?
Two cars of the same mass approach an
extremely icy four-way perpendicular
intersection. Car A travels northward at 30 m/s
and car B is travelling eastward. They collide and
stick together, traveling at 28° north of east.
What was the initial velocity of car B?
9.6 Center of Mass
63. Three point masses are placed at the corners of
a triangle as shown in the figure below.
62. Find the center of mass of the three-mass
system.
64. Two particles of masses and separated
by a horizontal distance Dare released from the
same height hat the same time. Find the vertical
position of the center of mass of these two
particles at a time before the two particles strike
the ground. Assume no air resistance.
65. Two particles of masses and separated
by a horizontal distance Dare let go from the
same height hat different times. Particle 1 starts
at , and particle 2 is let go at . Find
the vertical position of the center of mass at a
time before the first particle strikes the ground.
Assume no air resistance.
66. Two particles of masses and move
Access for free at openstax.org
uniformly in different circles of radii and
about origin in the x, y-plane. The x- and
y-coordinates of the center of mass and that of
particle 1 are given as follows (where length is in
meters and tin seconds):
and:
a. b. Find the radius of the circle in which
particle 1 moves.
Find the x- and y-coordinates of particle 2
and the radius of the circle this particle
moves.
67. Two particles of masses and move
uniformly in different circles of radii and
about the origin in the x, y-plane. The
coordinates of the two particles in meters are
given as follows ( for both). Here tis in
seconds:
68. 69. 70. 71. a. b. c. Find the radii of the circles of motion of
both particles.
Find the x- and y-coordinates of the center
of mass.
Decide if the center of mass moves in a
circle by plotting its trajectory.
Find the center of mass of a one-meter long rod,
made of 50 cm of iron (density ) and 50
cm of aluminum (density ).
Find the center of mass of a rod of length L
whose mass density changes from one end to
the other quadratically. That is, if the rod is laid
out along the x-axis with one end at the origin
and the other end at , the density is given
by , where and
are constant values.
Find the center of mass of a rectangular block of
length a and width bthat has a nonuniform
density such that when the rectangle is placed in
the x,y-plane with one corner at the origin and
the block placed in the first quadrant with the
two edges along the x- and y-axes, the density is
given by , where is a constant.
Find the center of mass of a rectangular material
72. 73. 74. 75. 76. of length a and width bmade up of a material of
nonuniform density. The density is such that
when the rectangle is placed in the xy-plane, the
density is given by .
A cube of side a is cut out of another cube of
side bas shown in the figure below.
Find the location of the center of mass of the
structure. (Hint: Think of the missing part as a
negative mass overlapping a positive mass.)
Find the center of mass of a cone of uniform
density that has a radius Rat the base, height h ,
and mass M . Let the origin be at the center of the
base of the cone and have +z going through the
cone vertex.
Find the center of mass of a thin wire of mass m
and length Lbent in a semicircular shape. Let
the origin be at the center of the semicircle and
have the wire arc from the +x axis, cross the +y
axis, and terminate at the −x axis.
Find the center of mass of a uniform thin
semicircular plate of radius R . Let the origin be
at the center of the semicircle, the plate arc from
the +x axis to the −x axis, and the z axis be
perpendicular to the plate.
Find the center of mass of a sphere of mass M
and radius Rand a cylinder of mass m, radius r,
and height harranged as shown below.
9 • Chapter Review 445
78. 79. Express your answers in a coordinate system
that has the origin at the center of the cylinder.
9.7 Rocket Propulsion
77. (a) A 5.00-kg squid initially at rest ejects 0.250
kg of fluid with a velocity of 10.0 m/s. What is
the recoil velocity of the squid if the ejection is
done in 0.100 s and there is a 5.00-Nfrictional
force opposing the squid’s movement?
(b) How much energy is lost to work done
against friction?
A rocket takes off from Earth and reaches a
speed of 100 m/s in 10.0 s. If the exhaust speed
is 1500 m/s and the mass of fuel burned is 100
kg, what was the initial mass of the rocket?
Repeat the preceding problem but for a rocket
that takes off from a space station, where there
is no gravity other than the negligible gravity due
to the space station.
How much fuel would be needed for a 1000-kg
rocket (this is its mass with no fuel) to take off
from Earth and reach 1000 m/s in 30 s? The
exhaust speed is 1000 m/s.
What exhaust speed is required to accelerate a
rocket in deep space from 800 m/s to 1000 m/s
in 5.0 s if the total rocket mass is 1200 kg and
the rocket only has 50 kg of fuel left?
Unreasonable Results Squids have been
reported to jump from the ocean and travel 30.0
m (measured horizontally) before re-entering
the water.
(a) Calculate the initial speed of the squid if it
leaves the water at an angle of 20.0°, assuming
negligible lift from the air and negligible air
resistance.
(b) The squid propels itself by squirting water.
80. 81. 82. 
446 9 • Chapter Review
What fraction of its mass would it have to eject
in order to achieve the speed found in the
previous part? The water is ejected at 12.0 m/s;
gravitational force and friction are neglected.
Additional Problems
83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88. 89. 90. 91. 92. 93. Two 70-kg canoers paddle in a single, 50-kg
canoe. Their paddling moves the canoe at 1.2
m/s with respect to the water, and the river
they’re in flows at 4 m/s with respect to the
land. What is their momentum with respect to
the land?
Which has a larger magnitude of momentum: a
3000-kg elephant moving at 40 km/h or a 60-kg
cheetah moving at 112 km/h?
A driver applies the brakes and reduces the
speed of her car by 20%, without changing the
direction in which the car is moving. By how
much does the car’s momentum change?
You friend claims that momentum is mass
multiplied by velocity, so things with more mass
have more momentum. Do you agree? Explain.
Dropping a glass on a cement floor is more likely
to break the glass than if it is dropped from the
same height on a grass lawn. Explain in terms of
the impulse.
Your 1500-kg sports car accelerates from 0 to
30 m/s in 10 s. What average force is exerted on
it during this acceleration?
A ball of mass is dropped. What is the formula
for the impulse exerted on the ball from the
instant it is dropped to an arbitrary time later?
Ignore air resistance.
Repeat the preceding problem, but including a
drag force due to air of
A 5.0-g egg falls from a 90-cm-high counter onto
the floor and breaks. What impulse is exerted by
the floor on the egg?
A car crashes into a large tree that does not
move. The car goes from 30 m/s to 0 in 1.3 m.
(a) What impulse is applied to the 70 kg driver by
the seatbelt, assuming he follows the same
motion as the car? (b) What is the average force
applied to the driver by the seatbelt?
Two hockey players approach each other head
on, each traveling at the same speed . They
collide and get tangled together, falling down
and moving off at a speed . What is the ratio
Access for free at openstax.org
94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100. (c) What is unreasonable about the results?
(d) Which premise is unreasonable, or which
premises are inconsistent?
of their masses?
You are coasting on your 10-kg bicycle at 15 m/s
and a 5.0-g bug splatters on your helmet. The
bug was initially moving at 2.0 m/s in the same
direction as you. If your mass is 60 kg, (a) what
is the initial momentum of you plus your bicycle?
(b) What is the initial momentum of the bug? (c)
What is your change in velocity due to the
collision with the bug? (d) What would the
change in velocity have been if the bug were
traveling in the opposite direction?
A load of gravel is dumped straight down into a
30 000-kg freight car coasting at 2.2 m/s on a
straight section of a railroad. If the freight car’s
speed after receiving the gravel is 1.5 m/s, what
mass of gravel did it receive?
Two carts on a straight track collide head on.
The first cart was moving at 3.6 m/s in the
positive x direction and the second was moving
at 2.4 m/s in the opposite direction. After the
collision, the second car continues moving in its
initial direction of motion at 0.24 m/s. If the
mass of the second car is 5.0 times that of the
first, what is the final velocity of the first car?
A 100-kg astronaut finds himself separated from
his spaceship by 10 m and moving away from
the spaceship at 0.1 m/s. To get back to the
spaceship, he throws a 10-kg tool bag away
from the spaceship at 5.0 m/s. How long will he
take to return to the spaceship?
Derive the equations giving the final speeds for
two objects that collide elastically, with the
mass of the objects being and and the
initial speeds being and (i.e.,
second object is initially stationary).
Repeat the preceding problem for the case when
the initial speed of the second object is nonzero.
A child sleds down a hill and collides at 5.6 m/s
into a stationary sled that is identical to his. The
child is launched forward at the same speed,
leaving behind the two sleds that lock together
and slide forward more slowly. What is the
speed of the two sleds after this collision?
101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. For the preceding problem, find the final speed
of each sled for the case of an elastic collision.
A 90-kg football player jumps vertically into the
air to catch a 0.50-kg football that is thrown
essentially horizontally at him at 17 m/s. What is
his horizontal speed after catching the ball?
Three skydivers are plummeting earthward.
They are initially holding onto each other, but
then push apart. Two skydivers of mass 70 and
80 kg gain horizontal velocities of 1.2 m/s east
and 1.4 m/s southeast, respectively. What is the
horizontal velocity of the third skydiver, whose
mass is 55 kg?
Two billiard balls are at rest and touching each
other on a pool table. The cue ball travels at 3.8
m/s along the line of symmetry between these
balls and strikes them simultaneously. If the
collision is elastic, what is the velocity of the
three balls after the collision?
A billiard ball traveling at
collides with a wall that
is aligned in the direction. Assuming the
collision is elastic, what is the final velocity of
the ball?
Two identical billiard balls collide. The first one
is initially traveling at
and the second one at
. Suppose they collide
when the center of ball 1 is at the origin and the
center of ball 2 is at the point where Ris
the radius of the balls. What is the final velocity
of each ball?
Challenge Problems
114. A 65-kg person jumps from the first floor window of
a burning building and lands almost vertically on the
ground with a horizontal velocity of 3 m/s and
vertical velocity of . Upon impact with the
ground he is brought to rest in a short time. The
force experienced by his feet depends on whether
he keeps his knees stiff or bends them. Find the
force on his feet in each case.
107. 108. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113. 9 • Chapter Review 447
Repeat the preceding problem if the balls collide
when the center of ball 1 is at the origin and the
center of ball 2 is at the point .
Repeat the preceding problem if the balls collide
when the center of ball 1 is at the origin and the
center of ball 2 is at the point
Where is the center of mass of a semicircular
wire of radius Rthat is centered on the origin,
begins and ends on the x axis, and lies in the x,y
plane?
Where is the center of mass of a slice of pizza
that was cut into eight equal slices? Assume the
origin is at the apex of the slice and measure
angles with respect to an edge of the slice. The
radius of the pizza is R .
If 1% of the Earth’s mass were transferred to the
Moon, how far would the center of mass of the
Earth-Moon-population system move? The mass
of the Earth is and that of the
Moon is . The radius of the
Moon’s orbit is about .
You friend wonders how a rocket continues to
climb into the sky once it is sufficiently high
above the surface of Earth so that its expelled
gasses no longer push on the surface. How do
you respond?
To increase the acceleration of a rocket, should
you throw rocks out of the front window of the
rocket or out of the back window?
a. b. First find the impulse on the person from the
impact on the ground. Calculate both its
magnitude and direction.
Find the average force on the feet if the person
keeps his leg stiff and straight and his center
of mass drops by only 1 cm vertically and 1 cm
horizontally during the impact.
448 9 • Chapter Review
c. d. Find the average force on the feet if the person
bends his legs throughout the impact so that
his center of mass drops by 50 cm vertically
and 5 cm horizontally during the impact.
Compare the results of part (b) and (c), and
draw conclusions about which way is better.
You will need to find the time the impact lasts by
making reasonable assumptions about the
acceleration opposite to the motion. Although the
force is not constant during the impact, working with
constant average force for this problem is
acceptable.
115. Two projectiles of mass and are fired at
the same speed but in opposite directions from
two launch sites separated by a distance D . They
both reach the same spot in their highest point
and strike there. As a result of the impact they
stick together and move as a single body
afterwards. Find the place they will land.
116. Two identical objects (such as billiard balls) have
a one-dimensional collision in which one is
initially motionless. After the collision, the
moving object is stationary and the other moves
with the same speed as the other originally had.
Show that both momentum and kinetic energy
are conserved.
117. A ramp of mass Mis at rest on a horizontal surface.
A small cart of mass m is placed at the top of the
ramp and released. 118. Access for free at openstax.org
What are the velocities of the ramp and the cart
relative to the ground at the instant the cart leaves
the ramp?
Find the center of mass of the structure given in
the figure below. Assume a uniform thickness of 20
cm, and a uniform density of
CHAPTER 10
Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.1 Brazos wind farm in west Texas. During 2019, wind farms in the United States had an average power output of 34 gigawatts,
which is enough to power 28 million homes. (credit: modification of work by U.S. Department of Energy)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1 Rotational Variables
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
10.6 Torque
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion
INTRODUCTION
In previous chapters, we described motion (kinematics) and how to change motion (dynamics),
and we defined important concepts such as energy for objects that can be considered as point masses. Point
masses, by definition, have no shape and so can only undergo translational motion. However, we know from
everyday life that rotational motion is also very important and that many objects that move have both translation
and rotation. The wind turbines in our chapter opening image are a prime example of how rotational motion impacts
our daily lives, as the market for clean energy sources continues to grow.
We begin to address rotational motion in this chapter, starting with fixed-axis rotation. Fixed-axis rotation describes
the rotation around a fixed axis of a rigid body; that is, an object that does not deform as it moves. We will show how
to apply all the ideas we’ve developed up to this point about translational motion to an object rotating around a fixed
axis. In the next chapter, we extend these ideas to more complex rotational motion, including objects that both
rotate and translate, and objects that do not have a fixed rotational axis.
450 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.1 Rotational Variables
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physical meaning of rotational variables as applied to fixed-axis rotation
• Explain how angular velocity is related to tangential speed
• Calculate the instantaneous angular velocity given the angular position function
• Find the angular velocity and angular acceleration in a rotating system
• Calculate the average angular acceleration when the angular velocity is changing
• Calculate the instantaneous angular acceleration given the angular velocity function
So far in this text, we have mainly studied translational motion, including the variables that describe it:
displacement, velocity, and acceleration. Now we expand our description of motion to rotation—specifically,
rotational motion about a fixed axis. We will find that rotational motion is described by a set of related variables
similar to those we used in translational motion.
Angular Velocity
Uniform circular motion (discussed previously in Motion in Two and Three Dimensions) is motion in a circle at
constant speed. Although this is the simplest case of rotational motion, it is very useful for many situations, and we
use it here to introduce rotational variables.
In Figure 10.2, we show a particle moving in a circle. The coordinate system is fixed and serves as a frame of
reference to define the particle’s position. Its position vector from the origin of the circle to the particle sweeps out
the angle , which increases in the counterclockwise direction as the particle moves along its circular path. The
angle is called the angular position of the particle. As the particle moves in its circular path, it also traces an arc
length s. The particle may complete more than one revolution around the circle, and so the angle may be greater
than , and the arc length s may be greater than the circumference, .
FIGURE 10.2 A particle follows a circular path. As it moves counterclockwise, it sweeps out a positive angle traces out an arc length s.
with respect to the x-axis and
The angle is related to the radius of the circle and the arc length by
10.1
The angle , the angular position of the particle along its path, has units of radians (rad). There are radians in
Note that the radian measure is a ratio of length measurements, and therefore is a dimensionless quantity. As
the particle moves along its circular path, its angular position changes and it undergoes angular displacements
We can assign vectors to the quantities in Equation 10.1. The angle is a vector out of the page in Figure 10.2. The
angular position vector and the arc length both lie in the plane of the page. These three vectors are related to
Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 • Rotational Variables 451
each other by
10.2
That is, the arc length is the cross product of the angle vector and the position vector, as shown in Figure 10.3.
FIGURE 10.3 The angle vector points along the z-axis and the position vector and arc length vector both lie in the xy-plane. We see that
. All three vectors are perpendicular to each other.
The magnitude of the angular velocity, denoted by , is the time rate of change of the angle in its circular path. The instantaneous angular velocity is defined as the limit in which angular velocity :
as the particle moves
in the average
10.3
where is the angle of rotation (Figure 10.2). The units of angular velocity are radians per second (rad/s). Angular
velocity can also be referred to as the rotation rate in radians per second. In many situations, we are given the
rotation rate in revolutions/s or cycles/s. To find the angular velocity, we must multiply revolutions/s by , since
there are radians in one complete revolution. Since the direction of a positive angle in a circle is
counterclockwise, we take counterclockwise rotations as being positive and clockwise rotations as negative.
We can see how angular velocity is related to the tangential speed of the particle by differentiating Equation 10.1
with respect to time. We rewrite Equation 10.1 as
Taking the derivative with respect to time and noting that the radius r is a constant, we have
where we arrive at
. Here is just the tangential speed of the particle in Figure 10.2. Thus, by using Equation 10.3,
10.4
That is, the tangential speed of the particle is its angular velocity times the radius of the circle. From Equation 10.4,
we see that the tangential speed of the particle increases with its distance from the axis of rotation for a constant
angular velocity. This effect is shown in Figure 10.4. Two particles are placed at different radii on a rotating disk with
a constant angular velocity. As the disk rotates, the tangential speed increases linearly with the radius from the axis
of rotation. In Figure 10.4, we see that and . But the disk has a constant angular velocity, so
. This means or . Thus, since , .
452 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.4 Two particles on a rotating disk have different tangential speeds, depending on their distance to the axis of rotation.
Up until now, we have discussed the magnitude of the angular velocity which is a scalar quantity—the
change in angular position with respect to time. The vector is the vector associated with the angular velocity and
points along the axis of rotation. This is useful because when a rigid body is rotating, we want to know both the axis
of rotation and the direction that the body is rotating about the axis, clockwise or counterclockwise. The angular
velocity gives us this information. The angular velocity has a direction determined by what is called the right-
hand rule. The right-hand rule is such that if the fingers of your right hand wrap counterclockwise from the x-axis
(the direction in which increases) toward the y-axis, your thumb points in the direction of the positive z-axis
(Figure 10.5). An angular velocity that points along the positive z-axis therefore corresponds to a
counterclockwise rotation, whereas an angular velocity that points along the negative z-axis corresponds to a
clockwise rotation.
FIGURE 10.5 For counterclockwise rotation in the coordinate system shown, the angular velocity points in the positive z-direction by the
right-hand-rule.
Similar to Equation 10.2, one can state a cross product relation to the vector of the tangential velocity as stated in
Equation 10.4. Therefore, we have
10.5
Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 • Rotational Variables 453
That is, the tangential velocity is the cross product of the angular velocity and the position vector, as shown in Figure
10.6. From part (a) of this figure, we see that with the angular velocity in the positive z-direction, the rotation in the
xy-plane is counterclockwise. In part (b), the angular velocity is in the negative z-direction, giving a clockwise
rotation in the xy-plane.
FIGURE 10.6 The vectors shown are the angular velocity, position, and tangential velocity. (a) The angular velocity points in the positive
z-direction, giving a counterclockwise rotation in the xy-plane. (b) The angular velocity points in the negative z-direction, giving a clockwise
rotation.
EXAMPLE 10.1
Rotation of a Flywheel
A flywheel rotates such that it sweeps out an angle at the rate of radians. The wheel rotates
counterclockwise when viewed in the plane of the page. (a) What is the angular velocity of the flywheel? (b) What
direction is the angular velocity? (c) How many radians does the flywheel rotate through in 30 s? (d) What is the
tangential speed of a point on the flywheel 10 cm from the axis of rotation?
Strategy
The functional form of the angular position of the flywheel is given in the problem as , so by taking the
derivative with respect to time, we can find the angular velocity. We use the right-hand rule to find the angular
velocity. To find the angular displacement of the flywheel during 30 s, we seek the angular displacement , where
the change in angular position is between 0 and 30 s. To find the tangential speed of a point at a distance from the
axis of rotation, we multiply its distance times the angular velocity of the flywheel.
Solution
a. b. . We see that the angular velocity is a constant.
By the right-hand rule, we curl the fingers in the direction of rotation, which is counterclockwise in the plane of
the page, and the thumb points in the direction of the angular velocity, which is out of the page.
c. .
d. .
Significance
In 30 s, the flywheel has rotated through quite a number of revolutions, about 215 if we divide the angular
displacement by . A massive flywheel can be used to store energy in this way, if the losses due to friction are
minimal. Recent research has considered superconducting bearings on which the flywheel rests, with zero energy
loss due to friction.
Angular Acceleration
We have just discussed angular velocity for uniform circular motion, but not all motion is uniform. Envision an ice
skater spinning with his arms outstretched—when he pulls his arms inward, his angular velocity increases. Or think
about a computer’s hard disk slowing to a halt as the angular velocity decreases. We will explore these situations
454 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
later, but we can already see a need to define an angular acceleration for describing situations where changes.
The faster the change in , the greater the angular acceleration. We define the instantaneous angular acceleration
as the derivative of angular velocity with respect to time:
10.6
as .
, the vector associated
where we have taken the limit of the average angular acceleration, The units of angular acceleration are (rad/s)/s, or .
In the same way as we defined the vector associated with angular velocity , we can define with angular acceleration (Figure 10.7). If the angular velocity is along the positive z-axis, as in Figure 10.5, and
is positive, then the angular acceleration is positive and points along the axis. Similarly, if the angular velocity
is along the positive z-axis and is negative, then the angular acceleration is negative and points along the
axis.
FIGURE 10.7 The rotation is counterclockwise in both (a) and (b) with the angular velocity in the same direction. (a) The angular
acceleration is in the same direction as the angular velocity, which increases the rotation rate. (b) The angular acceleration is in the
opposite direction to the angular velocity, which decreases the rotation rate.
We can express the tangential acceleration vector as a cross product of the angular acceleration and the position
vector. This expression can be found by taking the time derivative of and is left as an exercise:
10.7
The vector relationships for the angular acceleration and tangential acceleration are shown in Figure 10.8.
FIGURE 10.8 (a) The angular acceleration is the positive z-direction and produces a tangential acceleration in a counterclockwise sense. (b)
The angular acceleration is in the negative z-direction and produces a tangential acceleration in the clockwise sense.
We can relate the tangential acceleration of a point on a rotating body at a distance from the axis of rotation in the
same way that we related the tangential speed to the angular velocity. If we differentiate Equation 10.4 with respect
to time, noting that the radius r is constant, we obtain
Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 • Rotational Variables 455
10.8
Thus, the tangential acceleration is the radius times the angular acceleration. Equation 10.4 and Equation 10.8
are important for the discussion of rolling motion (see Angular Momentum).
Let’s apply these ideas to the analysis of a few simple fixed-axis rotation scenarios. Before doing so, we present a
problem-solving strategy that can be applied to rotational kinematics: the description of rotational motion.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rotational Kinematics
1. 2. Examine the situation to determine that rotational kinematics (rotational motion) is involved.
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A sketch of the situation
is useful.
3. 4. Make a complete list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
Solve the appropriate equation or equations for the quantity to be determined (the unknown). It can be useful
to think in terms of a translational analog, because by now you are familiar with the equations of translational
motion.
5. Substitute the known values along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical
solutions complete with units. Be sure to use units of radians for angles.
6. Check your answer to see if it is reasonable: Does your answer make sense?
Now let’s apply this problem-solving strategy to a few specific examples.
EXAMPLE 10.2
A Spinning Bicycle Wheel
A bicycle mechanic mounts a bicycle on the repair stand and starts the rear wheel spinning from rest to a final
angular velocity of 250 rpm in 5.00 s. (a) Calculate the average angular acceleration in . (b) If she now hits the
brakes, causing an angular acceleration of −87.3 , how long does it take the wheel to stop?
Strategy
The average angular acceleration can be found directly from its definition because the final angular velocity
and time are given. We see that is 5.00 s. For part (b), we know the
angular acceleration and the initial angular velocity. We can find the stopping time by using the definition of average
angular acceleration and solving for , yielding
and Solution
a. Entering known information into the definition of angular acceleration, we get
Because is in revolutions per minute (rpm) and we want the standard units of acceleration, we need to convert from rpm to rad/s:
for angular
Entering this quantity into the expression for , we get
456 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
b. Here the angular velocity decreases from 26.2 rad/s (250 rpm) to zero, so that given to be –87.3 . Thus,
is −26.2 rad/s, and is
Significance
Note that the angular acceleration as the mechanic spins the wheel is small and positive; it takes 5 s to produce an
appreciable angular velocity. When she hits the brake, the angular acceleration is large and negative. The angular
velocity quickly goes to zero.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.1
The fan blades on a turbofan jet engine (shown below) accelerate from rest up to a rotation rate of 40.0 rev/s in 20
s. The increase in angular velocity of the fan is constant in time. (The GE90-110B1 turbofan engine mounted on a
Boeing 777, as shown, is currently the largest turbofan engine in the world, capable of thrusts of 330–510 kN.)
(a) What is the average angular acceleration?
(b) What is the instantaneous angular acceleration at any time during the first 20 s?
FIGURE 10.9 (credit: “Bubinator”/ Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 10.3
Wind Turbine
A wind turbine (Figure 10.10) in a wind farm is being shut down for maintenance. It takes 30 s for the turbine to go
from its operating angular velocity to a complete stop in which the angular velocity function is
, where is the time in seconds. If the turbine is rotating counterclockwise
looking into the page, (a) what are the directions of the angular velocity and acceleration vectors? (b) What is the
average angular acceleration? (c) What is the instantaneous angular acceleration at
Access for free at openstax.org
10.1 • Rotational Variables 457
FIGURE 10.10 A wind turbine that is rotating counterclockwise, as seen head on.
Strategy
a. b. c. Solution
a. b. Since the turbine is rotating counterclockwise, angular velocity velocity is decreasing, the angular acceleration velocity.
The initial angular velocity of the turbine, setting the average angular acceleration is
We are given the rotational sense of the turbine, which is counterclockwise in the plane of the page. Using the
right hand rule (Figure 10.5), we can establish the directions of the angular velocity and acceleration vectors.
We calculate the initial and final angular velocities to get the average angular acceleration. We establish the
sign of the angular acceleration from the results in (a).
We are given the functional form of the angular velocity, so we can find the functional form of the angular
acceleration function by taking its derivative with respect to time.
points out of the page. But since the angular
points into the page, in the opposite sense to the angular
. The final angular velocity is zero, so
c. Taking the derivative of the angular velocity with respect to time gives
Significance
We found from the calculations in (a) and (b) that the angular acceleration and the average angular acceleration
are negative. The turbine has an angular acceleration in the opposite sense to its angular velocity.
We now have a basic vocabulary for discussing fixed-axis rotational kinematics and relationships between rotational
variables. We discuss more definitions and connections in the next section.
458 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive the kinematic equations for rotational motion with constant angular acceleration
• Select from the kinematic equations for rotational motion with constant angular acceleration the
appropriate equations to solve for unknowns in the analysis of systems undergoing fixed-axis rotation
• Use solutions found with the kinematic equations to verify the graphical analysis of fixed-axis rotation
with constant angular acceleration
In the preceding section, we defined the rotational variables of angular displacement, angular velocity, and angular
acceleration. In this section, we work with these definitions to derive relationships among these variables and use
these relationships to analyze rotational motion for a rigid body about a fixed axis under a constant angular
acceleration. This analysis forms the basis for rotational kinematics. If the angular acceleration is constant, the
equations of rotational kinematics simplify, similar to the equations of linear kinematics discussed in Motion along a
Straight Line and Motion in Two and Three Dimensions. We can then use this simplified set of equations to describe
many applications in physics and engineering where the angular acceleration of the system is constant. Rotational
kinematics is also a prerequisite to the discussion of rotational dynamics later in this chapter.
Kinematics of Rotational Motion
Using our intuition, we can begin to see how the rotational quantities , and tare related to one another. For
example, we saw in the preceding section that if a flywheel has an angular acceleration in the same direction as its
angular velocity vector, its angular velocity increases with time and its angular displacement also increases. On the
contrary, if the angular acceleration is opposite to the angular velocity vector, its angular velocity decreases with
time. We can describe these physical situations and many others with a consistent set of rotational kinematic
equations under a constant angular acceleration. The method to investigate rotational motion in this way is called
kinematics of rotational motion.
To begin, we note that if the system is rotating under a constant acceleration, then the average angular velocity
follows a simple relation because the angular velocity is increasing linearly with time. The average angular velocity is
just half the sum of the initial and final values:
10.9
From the definition of the average angular velocity, we can find an equation that relates the angular position,
average angular velocity, and time:
Solving for , we have
10.10
where we have set . This equation can be very useful if we know the average angular velocity of the system.
Then we could find the angular displacement over a given time period. Next, we find an equation relating , , and t .
To determine this equation, we start with the definition of angular acceleration:
We rearrange this to get and then we integrate both sides of this equation from initial values to final
values, that is, from to tand . In uniform rotational motion, the angular acceleration is constant so it can
be pulled out of the integral, yielding two definite integrals:
Access for free at openstax.org
10.2 • Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration 459
Setting , we have
We rearrange this to obtain
10.11
where equation is the initial angular velocity. Equation 10.11 is the rotational counterpart to the linear kinematics
. With Equation 10.11, we can find the angular velocity of an object at any specified time t
given the initial angular velocity and the angular acceleration.
Let’s now do a similar treatment starting with the equation . We rearrange it to obtain and
integrate both sides from initial to final values again, noting that the angular acceleration is constant and does not
have a time dependence. However, this time, the angular velocity is not constant (in general), so we substitute in
what we derived above:
where we have set . Now we rearrange to obtain
10.12
Equation 10.12 is the rotational counterpart to the linear kinematics equation found in Motion Along a Straight Line
for position as a function of time. This equation gives us the angular position of a rotating rigid body at any time t
given the initial conditions (initial angular position and initial angular velocity) and the angular acceleration.
We can find an equation that is independent of time by solving for tin Equation 10.11 and substituting into Equation
10.12. Equation 10.12 becomes
or
10.13
Equation 10.10 through Equation 10.13 describe fixed-axis rotation for constant acceleration and are summarized
in Table 10.1.
460 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
Angular displacement from average angular velocity
Angular velocity from angular acceleration
Angular displacement from angular velocity and angular acceleration
Angular velocity from angular displacement and angular acceleration
TABLE 10.1 Kinematic Equations
Applying the Equations for Rotational Motion
Now we can apply the key kinematic relations for rotational motion to some simple examples to get a feel for how
the equations can be applied to everyday situations.
EXAMPLE 10.4
Calculating the Acceleration of a Fishing Reel
A deep-sea fisherman hooks a big fish that swims away from the boat, pulling the fishing line from his fishing reel.
The whole system is initially at rest, and the fishing line unwinds from the reel at a radius of 4.50 cm from its axis of
rotation. The reel is given an angular acceleration of for 2.00 s (Figure 10.11).
(a) What is the final angular velocity of the reel after 2 s?
(b) How many revolutions does the reel make?
FIGURE 10.11 Fishing line coming off a rotating reel moves linearly.
Strategy
Identify the knowns and compare with the kinematic equations for constant acceleration. Look for the appropriate
equation that can be solved for the unknown, using the knowns given in the problem description.
Solution
a. We are given from rest), so
and tand want to determine . The most straightforward equation to use is ,
since all terms are known besides the unknown variable we are looking for. We are given that (it starts
b. We are asked to find the number of revolutions. Because revolutions by finding in radians. We are given and t , and we know , we can find the number of
is zero, so we can obtain by using
Access for free at openstax.org
10.2 • Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration 461
Converting radians to revolutions gives
Significance
This example illustrates that relationships among rotational quantities are highly analogous to those among linear
quantities. The answers to the questions are realistic. After unwinding for two seconds, the reel is found to spin at
220 rad/s, which is 2100 rpm. (No wonder reels sometimes make high-pitched sounds.)
In the preceding example, we considered a fishing reel with a positive angular acceleration. Now let us consider
what happens with a negative angular acceleration.
EXAMPLE 10.5
. How long
Calculating the Duration When the Fishing Reel Slows Down and Stops
Now the fisherman applies a brake to the spinning reel, achieving an angular acceleration of does it take the reel to come to a stop?
Strategy
We are asked to find the time tfor the reel to come to a stop. The initial and final conditions are different from those
in the previous problem, which involved the same fishing reel. Now we see that the initial angular velocity is
and the final angular velocity is zero. The angular acceleration is given as
Examining the available equations, we see all quantities but tare known in this equation.
Solution
The equation states
, making it easiest to use
We solve the equation algebraically for tand then substitute the known values as usual, yielding
Significance
Note that care must be taken with the signs that indicate the directions of various quantities. Also, note that the time
to stop the reel is fairly small because the acceleration is rather large. Fishing lines sometimes snap because of the
accelerations involved, and fishermen often let the fish swim for a while before applying brakes on the reel. A tired
fish is slower, requiring a smaller acceleration.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.2
A centrifuge used in DNA extraction spins at a maximum rate of 7000 rpm, producing a “g-force” on the sample that
is 6000 times the force of gravity. If the centrifuge takes 10 seconds to come to rest from the maximum spin rate:
(a) What is the angular acceleration of the centrifuge? (b) What is the angular displacement of the centrifuge during
this time?
462 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
EXAMPLE 10.6
Angular Acceleration of a Propeller
Figure 10.12 shows a graph of the angular velocity of a propeller on an aircraft as a function of time. Its angular
velocity starts at 30 rad/s and drops linearly to 0 rad/s over the course of 5 seconds. (a) Find the angular
acceleration of the object and verify the result using the kinematic equations. (b) Find the angle through which the
propeller rotates during these 5 seconds and verify your result using the kinematic equations.
FIGURE 10.12 A graph of the angular velocity of a propeller versus time.
at
Strategy
a. Since the angular velocity varies linearly with time, we know that the angular acceleration is constant and
does not depend on the time variable. The angular acceleration is the slope of the angular velocity vs. time
graph, . To calculate the slope, we read directly from Figure 10.12, and see that and at . Then, we can verify the result using .
We use the equation since the time derivative of the angle is the angular velocity, we can find the
angular displacement by integrating the angular velocity, which from the figure means taking the area under
the angular velocity graph. In other words:
b. Then we use the kinematic equations for constant acceleration to verify the result.
Solution
a. Calculating the slope, we get
b. We see that this is exactly Equation 10.11 with a little rearranging of terms.
We can find the area under the curve by calculating the area of the right triangle, as shown in Figure 10.13.
Access for free at openstax.org
10.3 • Relating Angular and Translational Quantities 463
FIGURE 10.13 The area under the curve is the area of the right triangle.
We verify the solution using Equation 10.12:
Setting , we have
This verifies the solution found from finding the area under the curve.
Significance
We see from part (b) that there are alternative approaches to analyzing fixed-axis rotation with constant
acceleration. We started with a graphical approach and verified the solution using the rotational kinematic
equations. Since , we could do the same graphical analysis on an angular acceleration-vs.-time curve. The
area under an curve gives us the change in angular velocity. Since the angular acceleration is constant in this
section, this is a straightforward exercise.
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Given the linear kinematic equation, write the corresponding rotational kinematic equation
• Calculate the linear distances, velocities, and accelerations of points on a rotating system given the
angular velocities and accelerations
In this section, we relate each of the rotational variables to the translational variables defined in Motion Along a
Straight Line and Motion in Two and Three Dimensions. This will complete our ability to describe rigid-body
rotations.
Angular vs. Linear Variables
In Rotational Variables, we introduced angular variables. If we compare the rotational definitions with the
definitions of linear kinematic variables from Motion Along a Straight Line and Motion in Two and Three Dimensions,
we find that there is a mapping of the linear variables to the rotational ones. Linear position, velocity, and
acceleration have their rotational counterparts, as we can see when we write them side by side:
464 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
Linear Rotational
Position x
Velocity
Acceleration
Let’s compare the linear and rotational variables individually. The linear variable of position has physical units of
meters, whereas the angular position variable has dimensionless units of radians, as can be seen from the definition
of , which is the ratio of two lengths. The linear velocity has units of m/s, and its counterpart, the angular
velocity, has units of rad/s. In Rotational Variables, we saw in the case of circular motion that the linear tangential
speed of a particle at a radius r from the axis of rotation is related to the angular velocity by the relation .
This could also apply to points on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis. Here, we consider only circular motion. In
circular motion, both uniform and nonuniform, there exists a centripetal acceleration (Motion in Two and Three
Dimensions). The centripetal acceleration vector points inward from the particle executing circular motion toward
the axis of rotation. The derivation of the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration is given in Motion in Two and
Three Dimensions. From that derivation, the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration was found to be
10.14
where r is the radius of the circle.
Thus, in uniform circular motion when the angular velocity is constant and the angular acceleration is zero, we have
a linear acceleration—that is, centripetal acceleration—since the tangential speed in Equation 10.14 is a constant. If
nonuniform circular motion is present, the rotating system has an angular acceleration, and we have both a linear
centripetal acceleration that is changing (because is changing) as well as a linear tangential acceleration. These
relationships are shown in Figure 10.14, where we show the centripetal and tangential accelerations for uniform
and nonuniform circular motion.
FIGURE 10.14 (a) Uniform circular motion: The centripetal acceleration has its vector inward toward the axis of rotation. There is no
tangential acceleration. (b) Nonuniform circular motion: An angular acceleration produces an inward centripetal acceleration that is
changing in magnitude, plus a tangential acceleration .
The centripetal acceleration is due to the change in the direction of tangential velocity, whereas the tangential
Access for free at openstax.org
10.3 • Relating Angular and Translational Quantities 465
acceleration is due to any change in the magnitude of the tangential velocity. The tangential and centripetal
acceleration vectors and are always perpendicular to each other, as seen in Figure 10.14. To complete this
description, we can assign a total linear acceleration vector to a point on a rotating rigid body or a particle
executing circular motion at a radius r from a fixed axis. The total linear acceleration vector is the vector sum of
the centripetal and tangential accelerations,
10.15
The total linear acceleration vector in the case of nonuniform circular motion points at an angle between the
centripetal and tangential acceleration vectors, as shown in Figure 10.15. Since , the magnitude of the total
linear acceleration is
Note that if the angular acceleration is zero, the total linear acceleration is equal to the centripetal acceleration.
FIGURE 10.15 A particle is executing circular motion and has an angular acceleration. The total linear acceleration of the particle is the
vector sum of the centripetal acceleration and tangential acceleration vectors. The total linear acceleration vector is at an angle in between
the centripetal and tangential accelerations.
Relationships between Rotational and Translational Motion
We can look at two relationships between rotational and translational motion.
1. Generally speaking, the linear kinematic equations have their rotational counterparts. Table 10.2 lists the four
linear kinematic equations and the corresponding rotational counterpart. The two sets of equations look
similar to each other, but describe two different physical situations, that is, rotation and translation.
Rotational Translational
2. TABLE 10.2 Rotational and Translational Kinematic
Equations
The second correspondence has to do with relating linear and rotational variables in the special case of
circular motion. This is shown in Table 10.3, where in the third column, we have listed the connecting equation
that relates the linear variable to the rotational variable. The rotational variables of angular velocity and
466 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
acceleration have subscripts that indicate their definition in circular motion.
Rotational Translational Relationship ( )
s
TABLE 10.3 Rotational and Translational Quantities: Circular Motion
EXAMPLE 10.7
Linear Acceleration of a Centrifuge
A centrifuge has a radius of 20 cm and accelerates from a maximum rotation rate of 10,000 rpm to rest in 30
seconds under a constant angular acceleration. It is rotating counterclockwise. What is the magnitude of the total
acceleration of a point at the tip of the centrifuge at What is the direction of the total acceleration vector?
Strategy
With the information given, we can calculate the angular acceleration, which then will allow us to find the tangential
acceleration. We can find the centripetal acceleration at by calculating the tangential speed at this time. With
the magnitudes of the accelerations, we can calculate the total linear acceleration. From the description of the
rotation in the problem, we can sketch the direction of the total acceleration vector.
Solution
The angular acceleration is
Therefore, the tangential acceleration is
The angular velocity at is
Thus, the tangential speed at is
We can now calculate the centripetal acceleration at :
Since the two acceleration vectors are perpendicular to each other, the magnitude of the total linear acceleration is
Since the centrifuge has a negative angular acceleration, it is slowing down. The total acceleration vector is as
shown in Figure 10.16. The angle with respect to the centripetal acceleration vector is
Access for free at openstax.org
10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 467
The negative sign means that the total acceleration vector is angled toward the clockwise direction.
FIGURE 10.16 The centripetal, tangential, and total acceleration vectors. The centrifuge is slowing down, so the tangential acceleration is
clockwise, opposite the direction of rotation (counterclockwise).
Significance
From Figure 10.16, we see that the tangential acceleration vector is opposite the direction of rotation. The
magnitude of the tangential acceleration is much smaller than the centripetal acceleration, so the total linear
acceleration vector will make a very small angle with respect to the centripetal acceleration vector.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.3
A boy jumps on a merry-go-round with a radius of 5 m that is at rest. It starts accelerating at a constant rate up to an
angular velocity of 5 rad/s in 20 seconds. What is the distance travelled by the boy?
INTERACTIVE
Check out this PhET simulation (https:/ /openstax.org/l/28ladybugrevolutionrotation) to change the parameters of a
rotating disk (the initial angle, angular velocity, and angular acceleration), and place bugs at different radial
distances from the axis. The simulation then lets you explore how circular motion relates to the bugs’ xy-position,
velocity, and acceleration using vectors or graphs.
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the differences between rotational and translational kinetic energy
• Define the physical concept of moment of inertia in terms of the mass distribution from the rotational axis
• Explain how the moment of inertia of rigid bodies affects their rotational kinetic energy
• Use conservation of mechanical energy to analyze systems undergoing both rotation and translation
• Calculate the angular velocity of a rotating system when there are energy losses due to nonconservative
forces
So far in this chapter, we have been working with rotational kinematics: the description of motion for a rotating rigid
body with a fixed axis of rotation. In this section, we define two new quantities that are helpful for analyzing
properties of rotating objects: moment of inertia and rotational kinetic energy. With these properties defined, we will
468 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
have two important tools we need for analyzing rotational dynamics.
Rotational Kinetic Energy
Any moving object has kinetic energy. We know how to calculate this for a body undergoing translational motion, but
how about for a rigid body undergoing rotation? This might seem complicated because each point on the rigid body
has a different velocity. However, we can make use of angular velocity—which is the same for the entire rigid
body—to express the kinetic energy for a rotating object. Figure 10.17 shows an example of a very energetic rotating
body: an electric grindstone propelled by a motor. Sparks are flying, and noise and vibration are generated as the
grindstone does its work. This system has considerable energy, some of it in the form of heat, light, sound, and
vibration. However, most of this energy is in the form of rotational kinetic energy.
FIGURE 10.17 The rotational kinetic energy of the grindstone is converted to heat, light, sound, and vibration. (credit: Zachary David Bell,
US Navy)
Energy in rotational motion is not a new form of energy; rather, it is the energy associated with rotational motion, the
same as kinetic energy in translational motion. However, because kinetic energy is given by , and
velocity is a quantity that is different for every point on a rotating body about an axis, it makes sense to find a way to
write kinetic energy in terms of the variable , which is the same for all points on a rigid rotating body. For a single
particle rotating around a fixed axis, this is straightforward to calculate. We can relate the angular velocity to the
magnitude of the translational velocity using the relation , where r is the distance of the particle from the
axis of rotation and is its tangential speed. Substituting into the equation for kinetic energy, we find
In the case of a rigid rotating body, we can divide up any body into a large number of smaller masses, each with a
mass individual masses: and distance to the axis of rotation , such that the total mass of the body is equal to the sum of the
. Each smaller mass has tangential speed , where we have dropped the subscript t
for the moment. The total kinetic energy of the rigid rotating body is
and since for all masses,
Access for free at openstax.org
10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 469
10.16
The units of Equation 10.16 are joules (J). The equation in this form is complete, but awkward; we need to find a
way to generalize it.
Moment of Inertia
If we compare Equation 10.16 to the way we wrote kinetic energy in Work and Kinetic Energy, , this
suggests we have a new rotational variable to add to our list of our relations between rotational and translational
variables. The quantity is the counterpart for mass in the equation for rotational kinetic energy. This is an
important new term for rotational motion. This quantity is called the moment of inertia I , with units of :
10.17
For now, we leave the expression in summation form, representing the moment of inertia of a system of point
particles rotating about a fixed axis. We note that the moment of inertia of a single point particle about a fixed axis is
simply , with r being the distance from the point particle to the axis of rotation. In the next section, we explore
the integral form of this equation, which can be used to calculate the moment of inertia of some regular-shaped rigid
bodies.
The moment of inertia is the quantitative measure of rotational inertia, just as in translational motion, and mass is
the quantitative measure of linear inertia—that is, the more massive an object is, the more inertia it has, and the
greater is its resistance to change in linear velocity. Similarly, the greater the moment of inertia of a rigid body or
system of particles, the greater is its resistance to change in angular velocity about a fixed axis of rotation. It is
interesting to see how the moment of inertia varies with r , the distance to the axis of rotation of the mass particles in
Equation 10.17. Rigid bodies and systems of particles with more mass concentrated at a greater distance from the
axis of rotation have greater moments of inertia than bodies and systems of the same mass, but concentrated near
the axis of rotation. In this way, we can see that a hollow cylinder has more rotational inertia than a solid cylinder of
the same mass when rotating about an axis through the center. Substituting Equation 10.17 into Equation 10.16, the
expression for the kinetic energy of a rotating rigid body becomes
10.18
We see from this equation that the kinetic energy of a rotating rigid body is directly proportional to the moment of
inertia and the square of the angular velocity. This is exploited in flywheel energy-storage devices, which are
designed to store large amounts of rotational kinetic energy. Many carmakers are now testing flywheel energy
storage devices in their automobiles, such as the flywheel, or kinetic energy recovery system, shown in Figure
10.18.
470 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.18 A KERS (kinetic energy recovery system) flywheel used in cars. (credit: “cmonville”/Flickr)
The rotational and translational quantities for kinetic energy and inertia are summarized in Table 10.4. The
relationship column is not included because a constant doesn’t exist by which we could multiply the rotational
quantity to get the translational quantity, as can be done for the variables in Table 10.3.
Rotational Translational
TABLE 10.4 Rotational and
Translational Kinetic Energies and
Inertia
EXAMPLE 10.8
Moment of Inertia of a System of Particles
Six small washers are spaced 10 cm apart on a rod of negligible mass and 0.5 m in length. The mass of each washer
is 20 g. The rod rotates about an axis located at 25 cm, as shown in Figure 10.19. (a) What is the moment of inertia
of the system? (b) If the two washers closest to the axis are removed, what is the moment of inertia of the remaining
four washers? (c) If the system with six washers rotates at 5 rev/s, what is its rotational kinetic energy?
Access for free at openstax.org
10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 471
FIGURE 10.19 Six washers are spaced 10 cm apart on a rod of negligible mass and rotating about a vertical axis.
Strategy
a. b. c. Solution
We use the definition for moment of inertia for a system of particles and perform the summation to evaluate
this quantity. The masses are all the same so we can pull that quantity in front of the summation symbol.
We do a similar calculation.
We insert the result from (a) into the expression for rotational kinetic energy.
a. .
b. .
c. .
Significance
We can see the individual contributions to the moment of inertia. The masses close to the axis of rotation have a
very small contribution. When we removed them, it had a very small effect on the moment of inertia.
In the next section, we generalize the summation equation for point particles and develop a method to calculate
moments of inertia for rigid bodies. For now, though, Figure 10.20 gives values of moment of inertia for common
object shapes around specified axes.
472 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.20 Moment of inertia for common shapes of objects.
Applying Rotational Kinetic Energy
Now let’s apply the ideas of rotational kinetic energy and the moment of inertia table to get a feeling for the energy
associated with a few rotating objects. The following examples will also help get you comfortable using these
equations. First, let’s look at a general problem-solving strategy for rotational energy.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rotational Energy
1. 2. 3. 4. Determine that energy or work is involved in the rotation.
Determine the system of interest. A sketch usually helps.
Analyze the situation to determine the types of work and energy involved.
If there are no losses of energy due to friction and other nonconservative forces, mechanical energy is
conserved, that is, .
5. If nonconservative forces are present, mechanical energy is not conserved, and other forms of energy, such as
heat and light, may enter or leave the system. Determine what they are and calculate them as necessary.
6. 7. Eliminate terms wherever possible to simplify the algebra.
Evaluate the numerical solution to see if it makes sense in the physical situation presented in the wording of
the problem.
Access for free at openstax.org
10.4 • Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy 473
EXAMPLE 10.9
Calculating Helicopter Energies
A typical small rescue helicopter has four blades: Each is 4.00 m long and has a mass of 50.0 kg (Figure 10.21). The
blades can be approximated as thin rods that rotate about one end of an axis perpendicular to their length. The
helicopter has a total loaded mass of 1000 kg. (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy in the blades when they
rotate at 300 rpm. (b) Calculate the translational kinetic energy of the helicopter when it flies at 20.0 m/s, and
compare it with the rotational energy in the blades.
FIGURE 10.21 (a) Sketch of a four-blade helicopter. (b) A water rescue operation featuring a helicopter from the Auckland Westpac Rescue
Helicopter Service. (credit b: modification of work by “111 Emergency”/Flickr)
Strategy
Rotational and translational kinetic energies can be calculated from their definitions. The wording of the problem
gives all the necessary constants to evaluate the expressions for the rotational and translational kinetic energies.
Solution
a. The rotational kinetic energy is
We must convert the angular velocity to radians per second and calculate the moment of inertia before we can
find K . The angular velocity is
The moment of inertia of one blade is that of a thin rod rotated about its end, listed in Figure 10.20. The total I
is four times this moment of inertia because there are four blades. Thus,
Entering and Iinto the expression for rotational kinetic energy gives
b. Entering the given values into the equation for translational kinetic energy, we obtain
To compare kinetic energies, we take the ratio of translational kinetic energy to rotational kinetic energy. This
ratio is
474 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
Significance
The ratio of translational energy to rotational kinetic energy is only 0.380. This ratio tells us that most of the kinetic
energy of the helicopter is in its spinning blades.
EXAMPLE 10.10
Energy in a Boomerang
A person hurls a boomerang into the air with a velocity of 30.0 m/s at an angle of with respect to the
horizontal (Figure 10.22). It has a mass of 1.0 kg and is rotating at 10.0 rev/s. The moment of inertia of the
boomerang is given as where . (a) What is the total energy of the boomerang when it leaves
the hand? (b) How high does the boomerang go from the elevation of the hand, neglecting air resistance?
FIGURE 10.22 A boomerang is hurled into the air at an initial angle of .
Strategy
We use the definitions of rotational and linear kinetic energy to find the total energy of the system. The problem
states to neglect air resistance, so we don’t have to worry about energy loss. In part (b), we use conservation of
mechanical energy to find the maximum height of the boomerang.
Solution
a. Moment of inertia: .
Angular velocity: .
The rotational kinetic energy is therefore
The translational kinetic energy is
Thus, the total energy in the boomerang is
b. We use conservation of mechanical energy. Since the boomerang is launched at an angle, we need to write the
total energies of the system in terms of its linear kinetic energies using the velocity in the x- and y-directions.
The total energy when the boomerang leaves the hand is
The total energy at maximum height is
Access for free at openstax.org
10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 475
By conservation of mechanical energy, so we have, after canceling like terms,
Since , we find
Significance
In part (b), the solution demonstrates how energy conservation is an alternative method to solve a problem that
normally would be solved using kinematics. In the absence of air resistance, the rotational kinetic energy was not a
factor in the solution for the maximum height.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.4
A nuclear submarine propeller has a moment of inertia of . If the submerged propeller has a rotation
rate of 4.0 rev/s when the engine is cut, what is the rotation rate of the propeller after 5.0 s when water resistance
has taken 50,000 J out of the system?
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the moment of inertia for uniformly shaped, rigid bodies
• Apply the parallel axis theorem to find the moment of inertia about any axis parallel to one already known
• Calculate the moment of inertia for compound objects
In the preceding section, we defined the moment of inertia but did not show how to calculate it. In this section, we
show how to calculate the moment of inertia for several standard types of objects, as well as how to use known
moments of inertia to find the moment of inertia for a shifted axis or for a compound object. This section is very
useful for seeing how to apply a general equation to complex objects (a skill that is critical for more advanced
physics and engineering courses).
Moment of Inertia
We defined the moment of inertia Iof an object to be for all the point masses that make up the object.
Because r is the distance to the axis of rotation from each piece of mass that makes up the object, the moment of
inertia for any object depends on the chosen axis. To see this, let’s take a simple example of two masses at the end
of a massless (negligibly small mass) rod (Figure 10.23) and calculate the moment of inertia about two different
axes. In this case, the summation over the masses is simple because the two masses at the end of the barbell can
be approximated as point masses, and the sum therefore has only two terms.
In the case with the axis in the center of the barbell, each of the two masses m is a distance Raway from the axis,
giving a moment of inertia of
In the case with the axis at the end of the barbell—passing through one of the masses—the moment of inertia is
From this result, we can conclude that it is twice as hard to rotate the barbell about the end than about its center.
476 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.23 (a) A barbell with an axis of rotation through its center; (b) a barbell with an axis of rotation through one end.
In this example, we had two point masses and the sum was simple to calculate. However, to deal with objects that
are not point-like, we need to think carefully about each of the terms in the equation. The equation asks us to sum
over each ‘piece of mass’ a certain distance from the axis of rotation. But what exactly does each ‘piece of mass’
mean? Recall that in our derivation of this equation, each piece of mass had the same magnitude of velocity, which
means the whole piece had to have a single distance r to the axis of rotation. However, this is not possible unless we
take an infinitesimally small piece of mass dm, as shown in Figure 10.24.
FIGURE 10.24 Using an infinitesimally small piece of mass to calculate the contribution to the total moment of inertia.
The need to use an infinitesimally small piece of mass dm suggests that we can write the moment of inertia by
evaluating an integral over infinitesimal masses rather than doing a discrete sum over finite masses:
10.19
This, in fact, is the form we need to generalize the equation for complex shapes. It is best to work out specific
examples in detail to get a feel for how to calculate the moment of inertia for specific shapes. This is the focus of
most of the rest of this section.
A uniform thin rod with an axis through the center
Consider a uniform (density and shape) thin rod of mass Mand length Las shown in Figure 10.25. We want a thin
rod so that we can assume the cross-sectional area of the rod is small and the rod can be thought of as a string of
masses along a one-dimensional straight line. In this example, the axis of rotation is perpendicular to the rod and
passes through the midpoint for simplicity. Our task is to calculate the moment of inertia about this axis. We orient
the axes so that the z-axis is the axis of rotation and the x-axis passes through the length of the rod, as shown in the
figure. This is a convenient choice because we can then integrate along the x-axis.
Access for free at openstax.org
10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 477
FIGURE 10.25 Calculation of the moment of inertia Ifor a uniform thin rod about an axis through the center of the rod.
We define dm to be a small element of mass making up the rod. The moment of inertia integral is an integral over
the mass distribution. However, we know how to integrate over space, not over mass. We therefore need to find a
way to relate mass to spatial variables. We do this using the linear mass density of the object, which is the mass
per unit length. Since the mass density of this object is uniform, we can write
If we take the differential of each side of this equation, we find
since is constant. We chose to orient the rod along the x-axis for convenience—this is where that choice becomes
very helpful. Note that a piece of the rod dllies completely along the x-axis and has a length dx; in fact, in
this situation. We can therefore write , giving us an integration variable that we know how to deal with.
The distance of each piece of mass dm from the axis is given by the variable x, as shown in the figure. Putting this all
together, we obtain
The last step is to be careful about our limits of integration. The rod extends from axis is in the middle of the rod at . This gives us
to , since the
Next, we calculate the moment of inertia for the same uniform thin rod but with a different axis choice so we can
compare the results. We would expect the moment of inertia to be smaller about an axis through the center of mass
than the endpoint axis, just as it was for the barbell example at the start of this section. This happens because more
mass is distributed farther from the axis of rotation.
A uniform thin rod with axis at the end
Now consider the same uniform thin rod of mass Mand length L , but this time we move the axis of rotation to the
end of the rod. We wish to find the moment of inertia about this new axis (Figure 10.26). The quantity dm is again
defined to be a small element of mass making up the rod. Just as before, we obtain
However, this time we have different limits of integration. The rod extends from the end of the rod at . Therefore we find
to , since the axis is at
478 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.26 Calculation of the moment of inertia Ifor a uniform thin rod about an axis through the end of the rod.
Note the rotational inertia of the rod about its endpoint is larger than the rotational inertia about its center
(consistent with the barbell example) by a factor of four.
The Parallel-Axis Theorem
The similarity between the process of finding the moment of inertia of a rod about an axis through its middle and
about an axis through its end is striking, and suggests that there might be a simpler method for determining the
moment of inertia for a rod about any axis parallel to the axis through the center of mass. Such an axis is called a
parallel axis. There is a theorem for this, called the parallel-axis theorem, which we state here but do not derive in
this text.
PARALLEL-AXIS THEOREM
Let m be the mass of an object and let dbe the distance from an axis through the object’s center of mass to a
new axis. Then we have
10.20
Let’s apply this to the rod examples solved above:
This result agrees with our more lengthy calculation from above. This is a useful equation that we apply in some of
the examples and problems.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.5
What is the moment of inertia of a cylinder of radius Rand mass m about an axis through a point on the surface, as
shown below?
A uniform thin disk about an axis through the center
Integrating to find the moment of inertia of a two-dimensional object is a little bit trickier, but one shape is
commonly done at this level of study—a uniform thin disk about an axis through its center (Figure 10.27).
Access for free at openstax.org
10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 479
FIGURE 10.27 Calculating the moment of inertia for a thin disk about an axis through its center.
Since the disk is thin, we can take the mass as distributed entirely in the xy-plane. We again start with the
relationship for the surface mass density, which is the mass per unit surface area. Since it is uniform, the surface
mass density is constant:
Now we use a simplification for the area. The area can be thought of as made up of a series of thin rings, where each
ring is a mass increment dm of radius r equidistant from the axis, as shown in part (b) of the figure. The infinitesimal
area of each ring dAis therefore given by the length of each ring ( ) times the infinitesimal width of each ring dr:
The full area of the disk is then made up from adding all the thin rings with a radius range from 0 to R . This radius
range then becomes our limits of integration for dr, that is, we integrate from to . Putting this all
together, we have
Note that this agrees with the value given in Figure 10.20.
Calculating the moment of inertia for compound objects
Now consider a compound object such as that in Figure 10.28, which depicts a thin disk at the end of a thin rod. This
cannot be easily integrated to find the moment of inertia because it is not a uniformly shaped object. However, if we
go back to the initial definition of moment of inertia as a summation, we can reason that a compound object’s
moment of inertia can be found from the sum of each part of the object:
10.21
It is important to note that the moments of inertia of the objects in Equation 10.21 are about a common axis. In the
case of this object, that would be a rod of length Lrotating about its end, and a thin disk of radius Rrotating about an
axis shifted off of the center by a distance , where Ris the radius of the disk. Let’s define the mass of the rod
to be and the mass of the disk to be
480 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.28 Compound object consisting of a disk at the end of a rod. The axis of rotation is located at A .
The moment of inertia of the rod is simply , but we have to use the parallel-axis theorem to find the moment
of inertia of the disk about the axis shown. The moment of inertia of the disk about its center is and we
apply the parallel-axis theorem to find
Adding the moment of inertia of the rod plus the moment of inertia of the disk with a shifted axis of rotation, we find
the moment of inertia for the compound object to be
Applying moment of inertia calculations to solve problems
Now let’s examine some practical applications of moment of inertia calculations.
EXAMPLE 10.11
Person on a Merry-Go-Round
A 25-kg child stands at a distance from the axis of a rotating merry-go-round (Figure 10.29). The merry-
go-round can be approximated as a uniform solid disk with a mass of 500 kg and a radius of 2.0 m. Find the moment
of inertia of this system.
FIGURE 10.29 Calculating the moment of inertia for a child on a merry-go-round.
Strategy
This problem involves the calculation of a moment of inertia. We are given the mass and distance to the axis of
rotation of the child as well as the mass and radius of the merry-go-round. Since the mass and size of the child are
much smaller than the merry-go-round, we can approximate the child as a point mass. The notation we use is
.
Our goal is to find .
Access for free at openstax.org
10.5 • Calculating Moments of Inertia 481
Solution
For the child, , and for the merry-go-round, . Therefore
Significance
The value should be close to the moment of inertia of the merry-go-round by itself because it has much more mass
distributed away from the axis than the child does.
EXAMPLE 10.12
Rod and Solid Sphere
Find the moment of inertia of the rod and solid sphere combination about the two axes as shown below. The rod has
length 0.5 m and mass 2.0 kg. The radius of the sphere is 20.0 cm and has mass 1.0 kg.
Strategy
Since we have a compound object in both cases, we can use the parallel-axis theorem to find the moment of inertia
about each axis. In (a), the center of mass of the sphere is located at a distance from the axis of rotation. In
(b), the center of mass of the sphere is located a distance Rfrom the axis of rotation. In both cases, the moment of
inertia of the rod is about an axis at one end. Refer to Table 10.4 for the moments of inertia for the individual
objects.
a. ;
;
b. ;
;
;
Significance
Using the parallel-axis theorem eases the computation of the moment of inertia of compound objects. We see that
the moment of inertia is greater in (a) than (b). This is because the axis of rotation is closer to the center of mass of
the system in (b). The simple analogy is that of a rod. The moment of inertia about one end is , but the
moment of inertia through the center of mass along its length is .
482 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
EXAMPLE 10.13
Angular Velocity of a Pendulum
A pendulum in the shape of a rod (Figure 10.30) is released from rest at an angle of mass 300 g. What is its angular velocity at its lowest point?
. It has a length 30 cm and
FIGURE 10.30 A pendulum in the form of a rod is released from rest at an angle of
Strategy
Use conservation of energy to solve the problem. At the point of release, the pendulum has gravitational potential
energy, which is determined from the height of the center of mass above its lowest point in the swing. At the bottom
of the swing, all of the gravitational potential energy is converted into rotational kinetic energy.
Solution
The change in potential energy is equal to the change in rotational kinetic energy, .
At the top of the swing: lowest point the rod swings.
. At the bottom of the swing, At the top of the swing, the rotational kinetic energy is . At the bottom of the swing, with respect to the
. Therefore:
or
Solving for , we have
Inserting numerical values, we have
Significance
Note that the angular velocity of the pendulum does not depend on its mass.
Access for free at openstax.org
10.6 • Torque 483
10.6 Torque
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how the magnitude of a torque depends on the magnitude of the lever arm and the angle the
force vector makes with the lever arm
• Determine the sign (positive or negative) of a torque using the right-hand rule
• Calculate individual torques about a common axis and sum them to find the net torque
An important quantity for describing the dynamics of a rotating rigid body is torque. We see the application of torque
in many ways in our world. We all have an intuition about torque, as when we use a large wrench to unscrew a
stubborn bolt. Torque is at work in unseen ways, as when we press on the accelerator in a car, causing the engine to
put additional torque on the drive train. Or every time we move our bodies from a standing position, we apply a
torque to our limbs. In this section, we define torque and make an argument for the equation for calculating torque
for a rigid body with fixed-axis rotation.
Defining Torque
So far we have defined many variables that are rotational equivalents to their translational counterparts. Let’s
consider what the counterpart to force must be. Since forces change the translational motion of objects, the
rotational counterpart must be related to changing the rotational motion of an object about an axis. We call this
rotational counterpart torque.
In everyday life, we rotate objects about an axis all the time, so intuitively we already know much about torque.
Consider, for example, how we rotate a door to open it. First, we know that a door opens slowly if we push too close
to its hinges; it is more efficient to rotate a door open if we push far from the hinges. Second, we know that we
should push perpendicular to the plane of the door; if we push parallel to the plane of the door, we are not able to
rotate it. Third, the larger the force, the more effective it is in opening the door; the harder you push, the more
rapidly the door opens. The first point implies that the farther the force is applied from the axis of rotation, the
greater the angular acceleration; the second implies that the effectiveness depends on the angle at which the force
is applied; the third implies that the magnitude of the force must also be part of the equation. Note that for rotation
in a plane, torque has two possible directions. Torque is either clockwise or counterclockwise relative to the chosen
pivot point. Figure 10.31 shows counterclockwise rotations.
FIGURE 10.31 Torque is the turning or twisting effectiveness of a force, illustrated here for door rotation on its hinges (as viewed from
overhead). Torque has both magnitude and direction. (a) A counterclockwise torque is produced by a force acting at a distance r from the
hinges (the pivot point). (b) A smaller counterclockwise torque is produced when a smaller force acts at the same distance r from the
484 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
hinges. (c) The same force as in (a) produces a smaller counterclockwise torque when applied at a smaller distance from the hinges. (d) A
smaller counterclockwise torque is produced by the same magnitude force as (a) acting at the same distance as (a) but at an angle that is
less than .
Now let’s consider how to define torques in the general three-dimensional case.
TORQUE
When a force is applied to a point Pwhose position is relative to O(Figure 10.32), the torque around Ois
10.22
FIGURE 10.32 The torque is perpendicular to the plane defined by From the definition of the cross product, the torque magnitude
and its direction is determined by the right-hand rule.
is perpendicular to the plane containing and has
where is the angle between the vectors and . The SI unit of torque is newtons times meters, usually written as
. The quantity is the perpendicular distance from Oto the line determined by the vector and is
called the lever arm. Note that the greater the lever arm, the greater the magnitude of the torque. In terms of the
lever arm, the magnitude of the torque is
10.23
The cross product also tells us the sign of the torque. In Figure 10.32, the cross product is along the
positive z-axis, which by convention is a positive torque. If is along the negative z-axis, this produces a
negative torque.
If we consider a disk that is free to rotate about an axis through the center, as shown in Figure 10.33, we can see
how the angle between the radius and the force affects the magnitude of the torque. If the angle is zero, the
torque is zero; if the angle is , the torque is maximum. The torque in Figure 10.33 is positive because the
Access for free at openstax.org
10.6 • Torque 485
direction of the torque by the right-hand rule is out of the page along the positive z-axis. The disk rotates
counterclockwise due to the torque, in the same direction as a positive angular acceleration.
FIGURE 10.33 A disk is free to rotate about its axis through the center. The magnitude of the torque on the disk is .When , the
torque is zero and the disk does not rotate. When , the torque is maximum and the disk rotates with maximum angular acceleration.
Any number of torques can be calculated about a given axis. The individual torques add to produce a net torque
about the axis. When the appropriate sign (positive or negative) is assigned to the magnitudes of individual torques
about a specified axis, the net torque about the axis is the sum of the individual torques:
10.24
Calculating Net Torque for Rigid Bodies on a Fixed Axis
In the following examples, we calculate the torque both abstractly and as applied to a rigid body.
We first introduce a problem-solving strategy.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Finding Net Torque
1. Choose a coordinate system with the pivot point or axis of rotation as the origin of the selected coordinate
system.
2. 3. Determine the angle between the lever arm Take the cross product of and the force vector.
to determine if the torque is positive or negative about the pivot point or
axis.
4. Evaluate the magnitude of the torque using .
5. 6. Assign the appropriate sign, positive or negative, to the magnitude.
Sum the torques to find the net torque.
EXAMPLE 10.14
Calculating Torque
Four forces are shown in Figure 10.34 at particular locations and orientations with respect to a given xy-coordinate
system. Find the torque due to each force about the origin, then use your results to find the net torque about the
origin.
486 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
FIGURE 10.34 Four forces producing torques.
to determine the sign of the torque.
Strategy
This problem requires calculating torque. All known quantities––forces with directions and lever arms––are given in
the figure. The goal is to find each individual torque and the net torque by summing the individual torques. Be
careful to assign the correct sign to each torque by using the cross product of and the force vector .
Solution
Use to find the magnitude and The torque from force 40 N in the first quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is out of the page, positive.
The torque from force 20 N in the third quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is into the page, so it is negative.
The torque from force 30 N in the third quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is out of the page, positive.
The torque from force 20 N in the second quadrant is given by .
The cross product of and is out of the page.
The net torque is therefore
Significance
Note that each force that acts in the counterclockwise direction has a positive torque, whereas each force that acts
in the clockwise direction has a negative torque. The torque is greater when the distance, force, or perpendicular
components are greater.
EXAMPLE 10.15
Calculating Torque on a rigid body
Figure 10.35 shows several forces acting at different locations and angles on a flywheel. We have
. Find the net torque on the flywheel about an axis through the center.
, , and Access for free at openstax.org
10.6 • Torque 487
FIGURE 10.35 Three forces acting on a flywheel.
Strategy
We calculate each torque individually, using the cross product, and determine the sign of the torque. Then we sum
the torques to find the net torque.
Solution
We start with magnitude:
. If we look at Figure 10.35, we see that makes an angle of with the radius vector .
Taking the cross product, we see that it is out of the page and so is positive. We also see this from calculating its
Next we look at negative. Its value is
. The angle between and is and the cross product is into the page so the torque is
When we evaluate the torque due to does not produce any torque on the flywheel.
, we see that the angle it makes with is zero so We evaluate the sum of the torques:
Therefore,
Significance
The axis of rotation is at the center of mass of the flywheel. Since the flywheel is on a fixed axis, it is not free to
translate. If it were on a frictionless surface and not fixed in place, would cause the flywheel to translate, as well
as . Its motion would be a combination of translation and rotation.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.6
A large ocean-going ship runs aground near the coastline, similar to the fate of the Costa Concordia, and lies at an
angle as shown below. Salvage crews must apply a torque to right the ship in order to float the vessel for transport.
A force of acting at point Amust be applied to right the ship. What is the torque about the point of
488 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
contact of the ship with the ground (Figure 10.36)?
FIGURE 10.36 A ship runs aground and tilts, requiring torque to be applied to return the vessel to an upright position.
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the torques on rotating systems about a fixed axis to find the angular acceleration
• Explain how changes in the moment of inertia of a rotating system affect angular acceleration with a fixed
applied torque
In this section, we put together all the pieces learned so far in this chapter to analyze the dynamics of rotating rigid
bodies. We have analyzed motion with kinematics and rotational kinetic energy but have not yet connected these
ideas with force and/or torque. In this section, we introduce the rotational equivalent to Newton’s second law of
motion and apply it to rigid bodies with fixed-axis rotation.
Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
We have thus far found many counterparts to the translational terms used throughout this text, most recently,
torque, the rotational analog to force. This raises the question: Is there an analogous equation to Newton’s second
law, which involves torque and rotational motion? To investigate this, we start with Newton’s second law
for a single particle rotating around an axis and executing circular motion. Let’s exert a force on a point mass m
that is at a distance r from a pivot point (Figure 10.37). The particle is constrained to move in a circular path with
fixed radius and the force is tangent to the circle. We apply Newton’s second law to determine the magnitude of the
acceleration in the direction of . Recall that the magnitude of the tangential acceleration is proportional
to the magnitude of the angular acceleration by . Substituting this expression into Newton’s second law, we
obtain
Access for free at openstax.org
10.7 • Newton’s Second Law for Rotation 489
FIGURE 10.37 An object is supported by a horizontal frictionless table and is attached to a pivot point by a cord that supplies centripetal
is applied to the object perpendicular to the radius r, causing it to accelerate about the pivot point. The force is
force. A force perpendicular to r.
Multiply both sides of this equation by r,
Note that the left side of this equation is the torque about the axis of rotation, where r is the lever arm and Fis the
force, perpendicular to r. Recall that the moment of inertia for a point particle is . The torque applied
perpendicularly to the point mass in Figure 10.37 is therefore
The t or que on the particle is equal t o the moment of inertia about the rotation axis times the ang ular acceleration.
We can generalize this equation to a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis.
NEWTON’S SECOND LAW FOR ROTATION
If more than one torque acts on a rigid body about a fixed axis, then the sum of the torques equals the moment
of inertia times the angular acceleration:
10.25
The term is a scalar quantity and can be positive or negative (counterclockwise or clockwise) depending upon
the sign of the net torque. Remember the convention that counterclockwise angular acceleration is positive. Thus, if
a rigid body is rotating clockwise and experiences a positive torque (counterclockwise), the angular acceleration is
positive.
Equation 10.25 is Newton’s second law for rotation and tells us how to relate torque, moment of inertia, and
rotational kinematics. This is called the equation for rotational dynamics. With this equation, we can solve a whole
class of problems involving force and rotation. It makes sense that the relationship for how much force it takes to
rotate a body would include the moment of inertia, since that is the quantity that tells us how easy or hard it is to
change the rotational motion of an object.
Deriving Newton’s Second Law for Rotation in Vector Form
As before, when we found the angular acceleration, we may also find the torque vector. The second law
tells us the relationship between net force and how to change the translational motion of an object. We have a
vector rotational equivalent of this equation, which can be found by using Equation 10.7 and Figure 10.8. Equation
10.7 relates the angular acceleration to the position and tangential acceleration vectors:
We form the cross product of this equation with and use a cross product identity (note that ):
490 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
We now form the cross product of Newton’s second law with the position vector
Identifying the first term on the left as the sum of the torques, and Newton’s second law of rotation in vector form:
as the moment of inertia, we arrive at
10.26
This equation is exactly Equation 10.25 but with the torque and angular acceleration as vectors. An important point
is that the torque vector is in the same direction as the angular acceleration.
Applying the Rotational Dynamics Equation
Before we apply the rotational dynamics equation to some everyday situations, let’s review a general problem-
solving strategy for use with this category of problems.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Rotational Dynamics
1. Examine the situation to determine that torque and mass are involved in the rotation. Draw a careful sketch of
the situation.
2. 3. 4. Determine the system of interest.
Draw a free-body diagram. That is, draw and label all external forces acting on the system of interest.
Identify the pivot point. If the object is in equilibrium, it must be in equilibrium for all possible pivot
points––chose the one that simplifies your work the most.
5. Apply , the rotational equivalent of Newton’s second law, to solve the problem. Care must be taken
6. to use the correct moment of inertia and to consider the torque about the point of rotation.
As always, check the solution to see if it is reasonable.
EXAMPLE 10.16
Calculating the Effect of Mass Distribution on a Merry-Go-Round
Consider the father pushing a playground merry-go-round in Figure 10.38. He exerts a force of 250 N at the edge of
the 50.0-kg merry-go-round, which has a 1.50-m radius. Calculate the angular acceleration produced (a) when no
one is on the merry-go-round and (b) when an 18.0-kg child sits 1.25 m away from the center. Consider the merry-
go-round itself to be a uniform disk with negligible friction.
FIGURE 10.38 A father pushes a playground merry-go-round at its edge and perpendicular to its radius to achieve maximum torque.
Access for free at openstax.org
10.7 • Newton’s Second Law for Rotation 491
Strategy
The net torque is given directly by the expression , To solve for (which is the same in both cases) and moment of inertia I(which is greater in the second case).
Solution
a. The moment of inertia of a solid disk about this axis is given in Figure 10.20 to be
, we must first calculate the net torque
We have and , so
To find the net torque, we note that the applied force is perpendicular to the radius and friction is negligible, so
that
Now, after we substitute the known values, we find the angular acceleration to be
b. We expect the angular acceleration for the system to be less in this part because the moment of inertia is
greater when the child is on the merry-go-round. To find the total moment of inertia I , we first find the child’s
moment of inertia by approximating the child as a point mass at a distance of 1.25 m from the axis. Then
The total moment of inertia is the sum of the moments of inertia of the merry-go-round and the child (about
the same axis):
Substituting known values into the equation for α gives
Significance
The angular acceleration is less when the child is on the merry-go-round than when the merry-go-round is empty, as
expected. The angular accelerations found are quite large, partly due to the fact that friction was considered to be
negligible. If, for example, the father kept pushing perpendicularly for 2.00 s, he would give the merry-go-round an
angular velocity of 13.3 rad/s when it is empty but only 8.89 rad/s when the child is on it. In terms of revolutions per
second, these angular velocities are 2.12 rev/s and 1.41 rev/s, respectively. The father would end up running at
about 50 km/h in the first case.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.7
The fan blades on a jet engine have a moment of inertia . In 10 s, they rotate counterclockwise from rest
up to a rotation rate of 20 rev/s. (a) What torque must be applied to the blades to achieve this angular acceleration?
(b) What is the torque required to bring the fan blades rotating at 20 rev/s to a rest in 20 s?
492 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use the work-energy theorem to analyze rotation to find the work done on a system when it is rotated
about a fixed axis for a finite angular displacement
• Solve for the angular velocity of a rotating rigid body using the work-energy theorem
• Find the power delivered to a rotating rigid body given the applied torque and angular velocity
• Summarize the rotational variables and equations and relate them to their translational counterparts
Thus far in the chapter, we have extensively addressed kinematics and dynamics for rotating rigid bodies around a
fixed axis. In this final section, we define work and power within the context of rotation about a fixed axis, which has
applications to both physics and engineering. The discussion of work and power makes our treatment of rotational
motion almost complete, with the exception of rolling motion and angular momentum, which are discussed in
Angular Momentum. We begin this section with a treatment of the work-energy theorem for rotation.
Work for Rotational Motion
Now that we have determined how to calculate kinetic energy for rotating rigid bodies, we can proceed with a
discussion of the work done on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis. Figure 10.39 shows a rigid body that has
rotated through an angle from Ato Bwhile under the influence of a force . The external force is applied to
point P , whose position is , and the rigid body is constrained to rotate about a fixed axis that is perpendicular to the
page and passes through O . The rotational axis is fixed, so the vector moves in a circle of radius r, and the vector
is perpendicular to
FIGURE 10.39 A rigid body rotates through an angle From Equation 10.2, we have
from Ato Bby the action of an external force applied to point P .
Thus,
Note that obtain
is zero because is fixed on the rigid body from the origin Oto point P . Using the definition of work, we
Access for free at openstax.org
10.8 • Work and Power for Rotational Motion 493
where we used the identity for the rotational work done on a rigid body:
. Noting that , we arrive at the expression
10.27
The t otal work done on a rigid body is the sum of the t or ques int egrat ed over the angle through which the body
rotat es. The incremental work is
10.28
where we have taken the dot product in Equation 10.27, leaving only torques along the axis of rotation. In a rigid
body, all particles rotate through the same angle; thus the work of every external force is equal to the torque times
the common incremental angle . The quantity is the net torque on the body due to external forces.
Similarly, we found the kinetic energy of a rigid body rotating around a fixed axis by summing the kinetic energy of
each particle that makes up the rigid body. Since the work-energy theorem is valid for each particle, it is
valid for the sum of the particles and the entire body.
WORK-ENERGY THEOREM FOR ROTATION
The work-energy theorem for a rigid body rotating around a fixed axis is
10.29
where
and the rotational work done by a net force rotating a body from point Ato point Bis
10.30
We give a strategy for using this equation when analyzing rotational motion.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Work-Energy Theorem for Rotational Motion
1. 2. 3. Identify the forces on the body and draw a free-body diagram. Calculate the torque for each force.
Calculate the work done during the body’s rotation by every torque.
Apply the work-energy theorem by equating the net work done on the body to the change in rotational kinetic
energy.
Let’s look at two examples and use the work-energy theorem to analyze rotational motion.
494 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
EXAMPLE 10.17
Rotational Work and Energy
A torque is applied to a flywheel that rotates about a fixed axis and has a moment of inertia of
. If the flywheel is initially at rest, what is its angular velocity after it has turned through eight
revolutions?
Strategy
We apply the work-energy theorem. We know from the problem description what the torque is and the angular
displacement of the flywheel. Then we can solve for the final angular velocity.
Solution
The flywheel turns through eight revolutions, which is and therefore can come outside the integral in Equation 10.30, is
radians. The work done by the torque, which is constant
We apply the work-energy theorem:
With , we have
Therefore,
This is the angular velocity of the flywheel after eight revolutions.
Significance
The work-energy theorem provides an efficient way to analyze rotational motion, connecting torque with rotational
kinetic energy.
EXAMPLE 10.18
Rotational Work: A Pulley
A string wrapped around the pulley in Figure 10.40 is pulled with a constant downward force of magnitude 50 N.
The radius Rand moment of inertia Iof the pulley are 0.10 m and , respectively. If the string does
not slip, what is the angular velocity of the pulley after 1.0 m of string has unwound? Assume the pulley starts from
rest.
Access for free at openstax.org
10.8 • Work and Power for Rotational Motion 495
FIGURE 10.40 (a) A string is wrapped around a pulley of radius R . (b) The free-body diagram.
Strategy
Looking at the free-body diagram, we see that neither , the force on the bearings of the pulley, nor , the weight
of the pulley, exerts a torque around the rotational axis, and therefore does no work on the pulley. As the pulley
rotates through an angle acts through a distance dsuch that
Solution
Since the torque due to has magnitude , we have
If the force on the string acts through a distance of 1.0 m, we have, from the work-energy theorem,
Solving for , we obtain
Power for Rotational Motion
Power always comes up in the discussion of applications in engineering and physics. Power for rotational motion is
equally as important as power in linear motion and can be derived in a similar way as in linear motion when the force
is a constant. The linear power when the force is a constant is . If the net torque is constant over the
angular displacement, Equation 10.25 simplifies and the net torque can be taken out of the integral. In the following
discussion, we assume the net torque is constant. We can apply the definition of power derived in Power to
rotational motion. From Work and Kinetic Energy, the instantaneous power (or just power) is defined as the rate of
doing work,
If we have a constant net torque, Equation 10.25 becomes and the power is
or
496 10 • Fixed-Axis Rotation
10.31
EXAMPLE 10.19
We are given the rotation rate in rev/min and the power consumption, so we can easily calculate the torque.
Torque on a Boat Propeller
A boat engine operating at Strategy
Solution
is running at 300 rev/min. What is the torque on the propeller shaft?
Significance
It is important to note the radian is a dimensionless unit because its definition is the ratio of two lengths. It
therefore does not appear in the solution.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 10.8
A constant torque of required to keep the turbine rotating?
is applied to a wind turbine to keep it rotating at 6 rad/s. What is the power
Rotational and Translational Relationships Summarized
The rotational quantities and their linear analog are summarized in three tables. Table 10.5 summarizes the
rotational variables for circular motion about a fixed axis with their linear analogs and the connecting equation,
except for the centripetal acceleration, which stands by itself. Table 10.6 summarizes the rotational and
translational kinematic equations. Table 10.7 summarizes the rotational dynamics equations with their linear
analogs.
Rotational Translational Relationship
TABLE 10.5 Rotational and Translational Variables:
Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
10.8 • Work and Power for Rotational Motion 497
Rotational Translational
TABLE 10.6 Rotational and Translational Kinematic
Equations: Summary
Rotational Translational
m
TABLE 10.7 Rotational and Translational Equations:
Dynamics
498 10 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
angular acceleration time rate of change of angular
velocity
angular position angle a body has rotated through in
a fixed coordinate system
angular velocity time rate of change of angular
position
instantaneous angular acceleration derivative of
angular velocity with respect to time
instantaneous angular velocity derivative of angular
position with respect to time
kinematics of rotational motion describes the
relationships among rotation angle, angular velocity,
angular acceleration, and time
lever arm perpendicular distance from the line that
the force vector lies on to a given axis
linear mass density the mass per unit length of a
one dimensional object
moment of inertia rotational mass of rigid bodies
that relates to how easy or hard it will be to change
the angular velocity of the rotating rigid body
Newton’s second law for rotation sum of the torques
on a rotating system equals its moment of inertia
times its angular acceleration
Key Equations
Angular position
Angular velocity
Tangential speed
Angular acceleration
Tangential acceleration
Average angular velocity
Angular displacement
Angular velocity from constant angular acceleration
Angular velocity from displacement and
constant angular acceleration
Change in angular velocity
Total acceleration
Rotational kinetic energy
Moment of inertia
Rotational kinetic energy in terms of the
moment of inertia of a rigid body
Moment of inertia of a continuous object
Access for free at openstax.org
parallel axis axis of rotation that is parallel to an axis
about which the moment of inertia of an object is
known
parallel-axis theorem if the moment of inertia is
known for a given axis, it can be found for any axis
parallel to it
rotational dynamics analysis of rotational motion
using the net torque and moment of inertia to find
the angular acceleration
rotational kinetic energy kinetic energy due to the
rotation of an object; this is part of its total kinetic
energy
rotational work work done on a rigid body due to the
sum of the torques integrated over the angle
through with the body rotates
surface mass density mass per unit area of a two
dimensional object
torque cross product of a force and a lever arm to a
given axis
total linear acceleration vector sum of the
centripetal acceleration vector and the tangential
acceleration vector
10 • Chapter Review 499
Parallel-axis theorem
Moment of inertia of a compound object
Torque vector
Magnitude of torque
Total torque
Newton’s second law for rotation
Incremental work done by a torque
Work-energy theorem
Rotational work done by net force
Rotational power
Summary
10.1 Rotational Variables
• The angular position of a rotating body is the
angle the body has rotated through in a fixed
coordinate system, which serves as a frame of
reference.
• The angular velocity of a rotating body about a
fixed axis is defined as , the rotational
rate of the body in radians per second. The
instantaneous angular velocity of a rotating body
is the derivative with respect
to time of the angular position , found by taking
the limit in the average angular velocity
. The angular velocity relates to the
tangential speed of a point on the rotating body
through the relation , where r is the
radius to the point and is the tangential speed
at the given point.
• The angular velocity is found using the right-
hand rule. If the fingers curl in the direction of
rotation about a fixed axis, the thumb points in
the direction of (see Figure 10.5).
• If the system’s angular velocity is not constant,
then the system has an angular acceleration. The
average angular acceleration over a given time
interval is the change in angular velocity over this
time interval, . The instantaneous
angular acceleration is the time derivative of
angular velocity, . The
angular acceleration is found by locating the
angular velocity. If a rotation rate of a rotating
body is decreasing, the angular acceleration is in
the opposite direction to . If the rotation rate is
increasing, the angular acceleration is in the
same direction as .
• The tangential acceleration of a point at a radius
from the axis of rotation is the angular
acceleration times the radius to the point.
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
• The kinematics of rotational motion describes
the relationships among rotation angle (angular
position), angular velocity, angular acceleration,
and time.
• For a constant angular acceleration, the angular
velocity varies linearly. Therefore, the average
angular velocity is 1/2 the initial plus final
angular velocity over a given time period:
• We used a graphical analysis to find solutions to
fixed-axis rotation with constant angular
acceleration. From the relation , we
found that the area under an angular velocity-vs.-
time curve gives the angular displacement,
. The results of the
graphical analysis were verified using the
kinematic equations for constant angular
acceleration. Similarly, since , the area
under an angular acceleration-vs.-time graph
500 10 • Chapter Review
gives the change in angular velocity:
.
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
• The linear kinematic equations have their
rotational counterparts such that there is a
mapping .
• A system undergoing uniform circular motion has
a constant angular velocity, but points at a
distance r from the rotation axis have a linear
centripetal acceleration.
• A system undergoing nonuniform circular motion
has an angular acceleration and therefore has
both a linear centripetal and linear tangential
acceleration at a point a distance r from the axis
of rotation.
• The total linear acceleration is the vector sum of
the centripetal acceleration vector and the
tangential acceleration vector. Since the
centripetal and tangential acceleration vectors
are perpendicular to each other for circular
motion, the magnitude of the total linear
acceleration is .
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
• The rotational kinetic energy is the kinetic energy
of rotation of a rotating rigid body or system of
particles, and is given by , where Iis
the moment of inertia, or “rotational mass” of the
rigid body or system of particles.
• The moment of inertia for a system of point
particles rotating about a fixed axis is
, where is the mass of the point
particle and is the distance of the point
particle to the rotation axis. Because of the
term, the moment of inertia increases as the
square of the distance to the fixed rotational axis.
The moment of inertia is the rotational
counterpart to the mass in linear motion.
• In systems that are both rotating and translating,
conservation of mechanical energy can be used if
there are no nonconservative forces at work. The
total mechanical energy is then conserved and is
the sum of the rotational and translational kinetic
energies, and the gravitational potential energy.
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
• Moments of inertia can be found by summing or
integrating over every ‘piece of mass’ that makes
Access for free at openstax.org
up an object, multiplied by the square of the
distance of each ‘piece of mass’ to the axis. In
integral form the moment of inertia is
.
• Moment of inertia is larger when an object’s mass
is farther from the axis of rotation.
• It is possible to find the moment of inertia of an
object about a new axis of rotation once it is
known for a parallel axis. This is called the
parallel axis theorem given by
, where dis
the distance from the initial axis to the parallel
axis.
• Moment of inertia for a compound object is
simply the sum of the moments of inertia for
each individual object that makes up the
compound object.
10.6 Torque
• The magnitude of a torque about a fixed axis is
calculated by finding the lever arm to the point
where the force is applied and using the relation
, where is the perpendicular
distance from the axis to the line upon which the
force vector lies.
• The sign of the torque is found using the right
hand rule. If the page is the plane containing
and , then is out of the page for positive
torques and into the page for negative torques.
• The net torque can be found from summing the
individual torques about a given axis.
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
• Newton’s second law for rotation, ,
says that the sum of the torques on a rotating
system about a fixed axis equals the product of
the moment of inertia and the angular
acceleration. This is the rotational analog to
Newton’s second law of linear motion.
• In the vector form of Newton’s second law for
rotation, the torque vector is in the same
direction as the angular acceleration . If the
angular acceleration of a rotating system is
positive, the torque on the system is also
positive, and if the angular acceleration is
negative, the torque is negative.
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion
• The incremental work dWin rotating a rigid body
about a fixed axis is the sum of the torques about
the axis times the incremental angle .
• The total work done to rotate a rigid body
through an angle about a fixed axis is the sum
of the torques integrated over the angular
displacement. If the torque is a constant as a
function of , then .
• The work-energy theorem relates the rotational
Conceptual Questions
10.1 Rotational Variables
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. A clock is mounted on the wall. As you look at it,
what is the direction of the angular velocity
vector of the second hand?
What is the value of the angular acceleration of
the second hand of the clock on the wall?
A baseball bat is swung. Do all points on the bat
have the same angular velocity? The same
tangential speed?
The blades of a blender on a counter are rotating
clockwise as you look into it from the top. If the
blender is put to a greater speed what direction
is the angular acceleration of the blades?
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
If a rigid body has a constant angular
acceleration, what is the functional form of the
angular velocity in terms of the time variable?
If a rigid body has a constant angular
acceleration, what is the functional form of the
angular position?
If the angular acceleration of a rigid body is zero,
what is the functional form of the angular
velocity?
A massless tether with a masses tied to both
ends rotates about a fixed axis through the
center. Can the total acceleration of the tether/
mass combination be zero if the angular velocity
is constant?
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
Explain why centripetal acceleration changes
the direction of velocity in circular motion but
not its magnitude.
In circular motion, a tangential acceleration can
change the magnitude of the velocity but not its
direction. Explain your answer.
Suppose a piece of food is on the edge of a
rotating microwave oven plate. Does it
experience nonzero tangential acceleration,
9. 10. 11. 10 • Chapter Review 501
work done to the change in rotational kinetic
energy: where
• The power delivered to a system that is rotating
about a fixed axis is the torque times the angular
velocity, .
12. 13. centripetal acceleration, or both when: (a) the
plate starts to spin faster? (b) The plate rotates
at constant angular velocity? (c) The plate slows
to a halt?
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
What if another planet the same size as Earth
were put into orbit around the Sun along with
Earth. Would the moment of inertia of the
system increase, decrease, or stay the same?
A solid sphere is rotating about an axis through
its center at a constant rotation rate. Another
hollow sphere of the same mass and radius is
rotating about its axis through the center at the
same rotation rate. Which sphere has a greater
rotational kinetic energy?
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
14. If a child walks toward the center of a merry-go-
round, does the moment of inertia increase or
decrease?
15. A discus thrower rotates with a discus in his
hand before letting it go. (a) How does his
moment of inertia change after releasing the
discus? (b) What would be a good approximation
to use in calculating the moment of inertia of the
discus thrower and discus?
Does increasing the number of blades on a
propeller increase or decrease its moment of
inertia, and why?
The moment of inertia of a long rod spun around
an axis through one end perpendicular to its
length is . Why is this moment of inertia
greater than it would be if you spun a point mass
m at the location of the center of mass of the rod
(at L /2) (that would be )?
Why is the moment of inertia of a hoop that has
a mass Mand a radius Rgreater than the
moment of inertia of a disk that has the same
mass and radius?
16. 17. 18. 
28. 29. 30. 502 10 • Chapter Review
10.6 Torque
19. What three factors affect the torque created by a
force relative to a specific pivot point?
20. Give an example in which a small force exerts a
large torque. Give another example in which a
large force exerts a small torque.
21. When reducing the mass of a racing bike, the
greatest benefit is realized from reducing the
mass of the tires and wheel rims. Why does this
allow a racer to achieve greater accelerations
than would an identical reduction in the mass of
the bicycle’s frame?
22. Can a single force produce a zero torque?
23. Can a set of forces have a net torque that is zero
and a net force that is not zero?
Problems
10.1 Rotational Variables
Calculate the angular velocity of Earth.
A track star runs a 400-m race on a 400-m
circular track in 45 s. What is his angular velocity
assuming a constant speed?
A wheel rotates at a constant rate of
. (a) What is its angular
velocity in radians per second? (b) Through what
angle does it turn in 10 s? Express the solution
in radians and degrees.
A particle moves 3.0 m along a circle of radius
1.5 m. (a) Through what angle does it rotate? (b)
If the particle makes this trip in 1.0 s at a
constant speed, what is its angular velocity? (c)
What is its acceleration?
A compact disc rotates at 500 rev/min. If the
diameter of the disc is 120 mm, (a) what is the
tangential speed of a point at the edge of the
disc? (b) At a point halfway to the center of the
disc?
Unreasonable results. The propeller of an
aircraft is spinning at 10 rev/s when the pilot
shuts off the engine. The propeller reduces its
angular velocity at a constant for a
time period of 40 s. What is the rotation rate of
the propeller in 40 s? Is this a reasonable
situation?
A gyroscope slows from an initial rate of 32.0
rad/s at a rate of . How long does it
take to come to rest?
31. 32. 33. 34. Access for free at openstax.org
24. Can a set of forces have a net force that is zero
and a net torque that is not zero?
25. In the expression can ever be less
than the lever arm? Can it be equal to the lever
arm?
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
26. 27. If you were to stop a spinning wheel with a
constant force, where on the wheel would you
apply the force to produce the maximum
negative acceleration?
A rod is pivoted about one end. Two forces
are applied to it. Under what
circumstances will the rod not rotate?
35. 36. On takeoff, the propellers on a UAV (unmanned
aerial vehicle) increase their angular velocity for
3.0 s from rest at a rate of
where tis measured in seconds. (a) What is the
instantaneous angular velocity of the propellers
at ? (b) What is the angular
acceleration?
The angular position of a rod varies as
radians from time . The rod has two beads on
it as shown in the following figure, one at 10 cm
from the rotation axis and the other at 20 cm from
the rotation axis. (a) What is the instantaneous
angular velocity of the rod at (b) What is
the angular acceleration of the rod? (c) What are
the tangential speeds of the beads at (d)
What are the tangential accelerations of the beads
at (e) What are the centripetal
accelerations of the beads at
10.2 Rotation with Constant Angular Acceleration
37. A wheel has a constant angular acceleration of
. Starting from rest, it turns through
38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 300 rad. (a) What is its final angular velocity? (b)
How much time elapses while it turns through
the 300 radians?
During a 6.0-s time interval, a flywheel with a
constant angular acceleration turns through 500
radians that acquire an angular velocity of 100
rad/s. (a) What is the angular velocity at the
beginning of the 6.0 s? (b) What is the angular
acceleration of the flywheel?
The angular velocity of a rotating rigid body
increases from 500 to 1500 rev/min in 120 s. (a)
What is the angular acceleration of the body? (b)
Through what angle does it turn in this 120 s?
A flywheel slows from 600 to 400 rev/min while
rotating through 40 revolutions. (a) What is the
angular acceleration of the flywheel? (b) How
much time elapses during the 40 revolutions?
A wheel 1.0 m in radius rotates with an angular
acceleration of . (a) If the wheel’s
initial angular velocity is 2.0 rad/s, what is its
angular velocity after 10 s? (b) Through what
angle does it rotate in the 10-s interval? (c) What
are the tangential speed and acceleration of a
point on the rim of the wheel at the end of the
10-s interval?
A vertical wheel with a diameter of 50 cm starts
from rest and rotates with a constant angular
acceleration of around a fixed axis
through its center counterclockwise. (a) Where
is the point that is initially at the bottom of the
wheel at (b) What is the point’s linear
acceleration at this instant?
A circular disk of radius 10 cm has a constant
angular acceleration of ; at its
angular velocity is 2.0 rad/s. (a) Determine the
disk’s angular velocity at . (b) What is
the angle it has rotated through during this time?
(c) What is the tangential acceleration of a point
on the disk at
The angular velocity vs. time for a fan on a
hovercraft is shown below. (a) What is the angle
through which the fan blades rotate in the first 8
seconds? (b) Verify your result using the
kinematic equations.
10 • Chapter Review 503
45. 46. 47. 48. A rod of length 20 cm has two beads attached to
its ends. The rod with beads starts rotating from
rest. If the beads are to have a tangential speed
of 20 m/s in 7 s, what is the angular acceleration
of the rod to achieve this?
10.3 Relating Angular and Translational Quantities
At its peak, a tornado is 60.0 m in diameter and
carries 500 km/h winds. What is its angular
velocity in revolutions per second?
A man stands on a merry-go-round that is
rotating at 2.5 rad/s. If the coefficient of static
friction between the man’s shoes and the merry-
go-round is , how far from the axis of
rotation can he stand without sliding?
An ultracentrifuge accelerates from rest to
100,000 rpm in 2.00 min. (a) What is the
average angular acceleration in ? (b) What
is the tangential acceleration of a point 9.50 cm
from the axis of rotation? (c) What is the
centripetal acceleration in and multiples of
g of this point at full rpm? (d) What is the total
distance traveled during the acceleration by a
point 9.5 cm from the axis of rotation of the
ultracentrifuge?
A wind turbine is rotating counterclockwise at
0.5 rev/s and slows to a stop in 10 s. Its blades
are 20 m in length. (a) What is the angular
acceleration of the turbine? (b) What is the
centripetal acceleration of the tip of the blades
at (c) What is the magnitude and
direction of the total linear acceleration of the
tip of the blade that lies along the positive x-axis
at
What is (a) the angular speed and (b) the linear
speed of a point on Earth’s surface at latitude
N. Take the radius of the Earth to be 6309
km. (c) At what latitude would your linear speed
be 10 m/s?
A child with mass 40 kg sits on the edge of a
49. 50. 51. 
504 10 • Chapter Review
52. 53. merry-go-round at a distance of 3.0 m from its
axis of rotation. The merry-go-round accelerates
from rest up to 0.4 rev/s in 10 s. If the
coefficient of static friction between the child
and the surface of the merry-go-round is 0.6,
does the child fall off before 5 s?
A bicycle wheel with radius 0.3 m rotates from
rest to 3 rev/s in 5 s. What is the magnitude and
direction of the total acceleration vector at the
edge of the wheel at 1.0 s?
The angular velocity of a flywheel with radius 1.0
m varies according to . Plot
from for .
Analyze these results to explain when
and when for a point on the flywheel at
a radius of 1.0 m.
10.4 Moment of Inertia and Rotational Kinetic Energy
A system of point particles is shown in the
following figure. Each particle has mass 0.3 kg
and they all lie in the same plane. (a) What is the
moment of inertia of the system about the given
axis? (b) If the system rotates at 5 rev/s, what is
its rotational kinetic energy?
54. 55. 56. 57. (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy of
Earth on its axis. (b) What is the rotational
kinetic energy of Earth in its orbit around the
Sun?
Calculate the rotational kinetic energy of a 12-kg
motorcycle wheel if its angular velocity is 120
rad/s and its inner radius is 0.280 m and outer
radius 0.330 m.
A baseball pitcher throws the ball in a motion
where there is rotation of the forearm about the
elbow joint as well as other movements. If the
linear velocity of the ball relative to the elbow
joint is 20.0 m/s at a distance of 0.480 m from
the joint and the moment of inertia of the
Access for free at openstax.org
forearm is kinetic energy of the forearm?
, what is the rotational
58. A diver goes into a somersault during a dive by
tucking her limbs. If her rotational kinetic energy
is 100 J and her moment of inertia in the tuck is
, what is her rotational rate during
the somersault?
59. An aircraft is coming in for a landing at 300
meters height when the propeller falls off. The
aircraft is flying at 40.0 m/s horizontally. The
propeller has a rotation rate of 20 rev/s, a
moment of inertia of , and a mass of
200 kg. Neglect air resistance so the rotation
rate does not change as the propeller falls. (a)
With what translational velocity does the
propeller hit the ground? (b) What is the rotation
rate of the propeller at impact?
60. An aircraft is coming in for a landing at 300
meters height when the propeller falls off. When
it comes off, the propeller has a rotation rate of
20 rev/s, a moment of inertia of , and
a mass of 200 kg. If air resistance is present and
reduces the propeller’s rotational kinetic energy
at impact by 30%, what is the propeller’s
rotation rate at impact?
61. A neutron star of mass and radius
10 km rotates with a period of 0.02 seconds.
What is its rotational kinetic energy?
62. An electric sander consisting of a rotating disk of
mass 0.7 kg and radius 10 cm rotates at 15 rev/
s. When applied to a rough wooden wall the
rotation rate decreases by 20%. (a) What is the
final rotational kinetic energy of the rotating
disk? (b) How much has its rotational kinetic
energy decreased?
63. A system consists of a disk of mass 2.0 kg and
radius 50 cm upon which is mounted an annular
cylinder of mass 1.0 kg with inner radius 20 cm
and outer radius 30 cm (see below). The system
rotates about an axis through the center of the
disk and annular cylinder at 10 rev/s. (a) What is
the moment of inertia of the system? (b) What is
its rotational kinetic energy?
10.5 Calculating Moments of Inertia
64. 65. While punting a football, a kicker rotates their
leg about the hip joint. The moment of inertia of
the leg is and its rotational kinetic
energy is 175 J. (a) What is the angular velocity
of the leg? (b) What is the velocity of tip of the
punter’s shoe if it is 1.05 m from the hip joint?
Using the parallel axis theorem, what is the moment
of inertia of the rod of mass m about the axis shown
below?
66. 67. Find the moment of inertia of the rod in the
previous problem by direct integration.
A uniform rod of mass 1.0 kg and length 2.0 m is
free to rotate about one end (see the following
figure). If the rod is released from rest at an
angle of with respect to the horizontal, what
is the speed of the tip of the rod as it passes the
horizontal position?
68. A pendulum consists of a rod of mass 2 kg and
length 1 m with a solid sphere at one end with
mass 0.3 kg and radius 20 cm (see the following
figure). If the pendulum is released from rest at
an angle of , what is the angular velocity at
the lowest point?
10 • Chapter Review 505
69. A solid sphere of radius 10 cm is allowed to rotate
freely about an axis. The sphere is given a sharp
blow so that its center of mass starts from the
position shown in the following figure with speed 15
cm/s. What is the maximum angle that the diameter
makes with the vertical?
70. Calculate the moment of inertia by direct integration
of a thin rod of mass Mand length Labout an axis
through the rod at L /3, as shown below. Check your
answer with the parallel-axis theorem.
10.6 Torque
71. Two flywheels of negligible mass and different radii
are bonded together and rotate about a common
axis (see below). The smaller flywheel of radius 30
cm has a cord that has a pulling force of 50 N on it.
What pulling force needs to be applied to the cord
connecting the larger flywheel of radius 50 cm such
that the combination does not rotate?
506 10 • Chapter Review
72. 73. 74. 75. The cylinder head bolts on a car are to be
tightened with a torque of 62.0 N . If a
mechanic uses a wrench of length 20 cm, what
perpendicular force must he exert on the end of
the wrench to tighten a bolt correctly?
(a) When opening a door, you push on it
perpendicularly with a force of 55.0 N at a
distance of 0.850 m from the hinges. What
torque are you exerting relative to the hinges?
(b) Does it matter if you push at the same height
as the hinges? There is only one pair of hinges.
When tightening a bolt, you push
perpendicularly on a wrench with a force of 165
N at a distance of 0.140 m from the center of the
bolt. How much torque are you exerting in
newton-meters (relative to the center of the
bolt)?
What hanging mass must be placed on the cord
to keep the pulley from rotating (see the
following figure)? The mass on the frictionless
plane is 5.0 kg. The mass on the plane is
connected to a cord that wraps around the
pulley’s inner radius of 20 cm. The hanging mass
is connected to a cord that wraps around the
pulley’s outer radius of 30 cm.
76. 77. A simple pendulum consists of a massless tether
50 cm in length connected to a pivot and a small
mass of 1.0 kg attached at the other end. What
is the torque about the pivot when the pendulum
makes an angle of with respect to the
vertical?
Calculate the torque about the z-axis that is out of
the page at the origin in the following figure, given
that
.
Access for free at openstax.org
78. A seesaw has length 10.0 m and uniform mass 10.0
kg and is resting at an angle of with respect to
the ground (see the following figure). The pivot is
located at 6.0 m. What magnitude of force needs to
be applied perpendicular to the seesaw at the raised
end so as to allow the seesaw to barely start to
rotate?
79. A pendulum consists of a rod of mass 1 kg and
length 1 m connected to a pivot with a solid
sphere attached at the other end with mass 0.5
kg and radius 30 cm. What is the torque about
the pivot when the pendulum makes an angle of
with respect to the vertical?
80. A torque of is required to raise a
drawbridge (see the following figure). What is the
tension necessary to produce this torque? Would it
be easier to raise the drawbridge if the angle were
larger or smaller?
81. A horizontal beam of length 3 m and mass 2.0 kg
has a mass of 1.0 kg and width 0.2 m sitting at the
end of the beam (see the following figure). What is
the torque of the system about the support at the
wall?
82. 83. What force must be applied to end of a rod along
the x-axis of length 2.0 m in order to produce a
torque on the rod about the origin of
?
point whose position is:
What is the torque about the origin of the force
if it is applied at the
10.7 Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
84. You have a grindstone (a disk) that is 90.0 kg,
has a 0.340-m radius, and is turning at 90.0
rpm, and you press a steel axe against it with a
radial force of 20.0 N. (a) Assuming the kinetic
10 • Chapter Review 507
coefficient of friction between steel and stone is
0.20, calculate the angular acceleration of the
grindstone. (b) How many turns will the stone
make before coming to rest?
85. Suppose you exert a force of 180 N tangential to
a 0.280-m-radius, 75.0-kg grindstone (a solid
disk). (a)What torque is exerted? (b) What is the
angular acceleration assuming negligible
opposing friction? (c) What is the angular
acceleration if there is an opposing frictional
force of 20.0 N exerted 1.50 cm from the axis?
86. A flywheel ( ) starting from rest
acquires an angular velocity of 200.0 rad/s while
subject to a constant torque from a motor for 5
s. (a) What is the angular acceleration of the
flywheel? (b) What is the magnitude of the
torque?
87. A constant torque is applied to a rigid body
whose moment of inertia is around
the axis of rotation. If the wheel starts from rest
and attains an angular velocity of 20.0 rad/s in
10.0 s, what is the applied torque?
88. A torque of 50.0 N-m is applied to a grinding
wheel ( ) for 20 s. (a) If it starts
from rest, what is the angular velocity of the
grinding wheel after the torque is removed? (b)
Through what angle does the wheel move while
the torque is applied?
89. A flywheel ( ) rotating at 500.0
rev/min is brought to rest by friction in 2.0 min.
What is the frictional torque on the flywheel?
90. A uniform cylindrical grinding wheel of mass
50.0 kg and diameter 1.0 m is turned on by an
electric motor. The friction in the bearings is
negligible. (a) What torque must be applied to
the wheel to bring it from rest to 120 rev/min in
20 revolutions? (b) A tool whose coefficient of
kinetic friction with the wheel is 0.60 is pressed
perpendicularly against the wheel with a force of
40.0 N. What torque must be supplied by the
motor to keep the wheel rotating at a constant
angular velocity?
91. Suppose when Earth was created, it was not
rotating. However, after the application of a
uniform torque for 6 days according to the
current length of a day, it was rotating at 1 rev/
day. (a) What was the angular acceleration
during the 6 days? (b) What torque was applied
to Earth during this period? (c) What force
tangent to Earth at its equator would produce
508 10 • Chapter Review
92. this torque?
A pulley of moment of inertia is mounted on a
wall as shown in the following figure. Light strings are
wrapped around two circumferences of the pulley and
weights are attached. What are (a) the angular
acceleration of the pulley and (b) the linear acceleration
of the weights? Assume the following data:
.
95. 93. A block of mass 3 kg slides down an inclined
plane at an angle of with a massless tether
attached to a pulley with mass 1 kg and radius
0.5 m at the top of the incline (see the following
figure). The pulley can be approximated as a
disk. The coefficient of kinetic friction on the
plane is 0.4. What is the acceleration of the
block?
96. 94. The cart shown below moves across the table top as the
block falls. What is the acceleration of the cart? Neglect
friction and assume the following
data:
Access for free at openstax.org
A uniform rod of mass and length is held vertically
by two strings of negligible mass, as shown below.
(a) Immediately after the string is cut, what is the
linear acceleration of the free end of the stick? (b) Of
the middle of the stick?
A thin stick of mass 0.2 kg and length is
attached to the rim of a metal disk of mass
and radius . The stick is free
to rotate around a horizontal axis through its other
end (see the following figure). (a) If the combination
is released with the stick horizontal, what is the
speed of the center of the disk when the stick is
vertical? (b) What is the acceleration of the center of
the disk at the instant the stick is released? (c) At
the instant the stick passes through the vertical?
10.8 Work and Power for Rotational Motion
97. 98. 99. 100. A wind turbine rotates at 20 rev/min. If its power
output is 2.0 MW, what is the torque produced
on the turbine from the wind?
A clay cylinder of radius 20 cm on a potter’s
wheel spins at a constant rate of 10 rev/s. The
potter applies a force of 10 N to the clay with his
hands where the coefficient of friction is 0.1
between his hands and the clay. What is the
power that the potter has to deliver to the wheel
to keep it rotating at this constant rate?
A uniform cylindrical grindstone has a mass of
10 kg and a radius of 12 cm. (a) What is the
rotational kinetic energy of the grindstone when
it is rotating at (b) After the
grindstone’s motor is turned off, a knife blade is
pressed against the outer edge of the grindstone
with a perpendicular force of 5.0 N. The
coefficient of kinetic friction between the
grindstone and the blade is 0.80. Use the work
energy theorem to determine how many turns
the grindstone makes before it stops.
A uniform disk of mass 500 kg and radius 0.25 m
is mounted on frictionless bearings so it can
rotate freely around a vertical axis through its
center (see the following figure). A cord is
wrapped around the rim of the disk and pulled
with a force of 10 N. (a) How much work has the
force done at the instant the disk has completed
three revolutions, starting from rest? (b)
Determine the torque due to the force, then
calculate the work done by this torque at the
instant the disk has completed three
revolutions? (c) What is the angular velocity at
that instant? (d) What is the power output of the
force at that instant?
101. A propeller is accelerated from rest to an angular
velocity of 1000 rev/min over a period of 6.0
seconds by a constant torque of
. (a) What is the moment of
102. 103. 104. 105. 10 • Chapter Review 509
inertia of the propeller? (b) What power is being
provided to the propeller 3.0 s after it starts
rotating?
A sphere of mass 1.0 kg and radius 0.5 m is
attached to the end of a massless rod of length
3.0 m. The rod rotates about an axis that is at
the opposite end of the sphere (see below). The
system rotates horizontally about the axis at a
constant 400 rev/min. After rotating at this
angular speed in a vacuum, air resistance is
introduced and provides a force on the
sphere opposite to the direction of motion. What
is the power provided by air resistance to the
system 100.0 s after air resistance is
introduced?
A uniform rod of length Land mass Mis held
vertically with one end resting on the floor as
shown below. When the rod is released, it rotates
around its lower end until it hits the floor.
Assuming the lower end of the rod does not slip,
what is the linear velocity of the upper end when it
hits the floor?
An athlete in a gym applies a constant force of
50 N to the pedals of a bicycle at a rate of the
pedals moving 60 rev/min. The length of the
pedal arms is 30 cm. What is the power
delivered to the bicycle by the athlete?
A 2-kg block on a frictionless inclined plane at
has a cord attached to a pulley of mass 1 kg
and radius 20 cm (see the following figure). The
block slides a distance of 0.50 m. (a) What is the
510 10 • Chapter Review
acceleration of the block down the plane? (b)
What is the work done by the cord on the pulley?
106. Small bodies of mass are attached to
opposite ends of a thin rigid rod of length Land
mass M . The rod is mounted so that it is free to
rotate in a horizontal plane around a vertical axis
Additional Problems
107. 108. 109. 110. 111. 112. A cyclist is riding such that the wheels of the
bicycle have a rotation rate of 3.0 rev/s. If the
cyclist brakes such that the rotation rate of the
wheels decrease at a rate of , how
long does it take for the cyclist to come to a
complete stop?
Calculate the angular velocity of the orbital
motion of Earth around the Sun.
A phonograph turntable rotating at 33 1/3 rev/
min slows down and stops in 1.0 min. (a) What is
the turntable’s angular acceleration, in
radians/s2, assuming it is constant? (b) How
many revolutions does the turntable make while
stopping?
With the aid of a string, a gyroscope is
accelerated from rest to 32 rad/s in 0.40 s under
a constant angular acceleration. (a) What is its
angular acceleration in ? (b) How many
revolutions does it go through in the process?
Suppose a piece of dust has fallen on a CD. If the
spin rate of the CD is 500 rpm, and the piece of
dust is 4.3 cm from the center, what is the total
distance traveled by the dust in 3 minutes?
(Ignore accelerations due to getting the CD
rotating.)
A system of point particles is rotating about a
fixed axis at 4 rev/s. The particles are fixed with
respect to each other. The masses and distances
to the axis of the point particles are
,
,
. (a) What is the
Access for free at openstax.org
113. 114. 115. (see below). What distance dfrom should the
rotational axis be so that a minimum amount of
work is required to set the rod rotating at an
angular velocity
moment of inertia of the system? (b) What is the
rotational kinetic energy of the system?
Calculate the moment of inertia of a skater given
the following information. (a) The 60.0-kg skater
is approximated as a cylinder that has a
0.110-m radius. (b) The skater with arms
extended is approximated by a cylinder that is
52.5 kg, has a 0.110-m radius, and has two
0.900-m-long arms which are 3.75 kg each and
extend straight out from the cylinder like rods
rotated about their ends.
A stick of length 1.0 m and mass 6.0 kg is free to
rotate about a horizontal axis through the center.
Small bodies of masses 4.0 and 2.0 kg are attached
to its two ends (see the following figure). The stick is
released from the horizontal position. What is the
angular velocity of the stick when it swings through
the vertical?
A pendulum consists of a rod of length 2 m and
mass 3 kg with a solid sphere of mass 1 kg and
radius 0.3 m attached at one end. The axis of
rotation is as shown below. What is the angular
velocity of the pendulum at its lowest point if it
is released from rest at an angle of
116. Calculate the torque of the 40-N force around the
axis through Oand perpendicular to the plane of the
page as shown below.
117. Two children push on opposite sides of a door
during play. Both push horizontally and
perpendicular to the door. One child pushes with
Challenge Problems
121. 122. 123. The angular acceleration of a rotating rigid body
is given by . If the body
starts rotating from rest at , (a) what is the
angular velocity? (b) Angular position? (c) What
angle does it rotate through in 10 s? (d) Where
does the vector perpendicular to the axis of
rotation indicating at lie at ?
Earth’s day has increased by 0.002 s in the last
century. If this increase in Earth’s period is
constant, how long will it take for Earth to come
to rest?
A disk of mass m, radius R , and area Ahas a
surface mass density (see the following
figure). What is the moment of inertia of the disk
about an axis through the center?
10 • Chapter Review 511
a force of 17.5 N at a distance of 0.600 m from
the hinges, and the second child pushes at a
distance of 0.450 m. What force must the
second child exert to keep the door from
moving? Assume friction is negligible.
118. The force of 119. 120. is applied at
. What is the torque of this
force about the origin?
An automobile engine can produce 200 N m of
torque. Calculate the angular acceleration
produced if 95.0% of this torque is applied to
the drive shaft, axle, and rear wheels of a car,
given the following information. The car is
suspended so that the wheels can turn freely.
Each wheel acts like a 15.0-kg disk that has a
0.180-m radius. The walls of each tire act like a
2.00-kg annular ring that has inside radius of
0.180 m and outside radius of 0.320 m. The
tread of each tire acts like a 10.0-kg hoop of
radius 0.330 m. The 14.0-kg axle acts like a rod
that has a 2.00-cm radius. The 30.0-kg drive
shaft acts like a rod that has a 3.20-cm radius.
A grindstone with a mass of 50 kg and radius 0.8
m maintains a constant rotation rate of 4.0 rev/s
by a motor while a knife is pressed against the
edge with a force of 5.0 N. The coefficient of
kinetic friction between the grindstone and the
blade is 0.8. What is the power provided by the
motor to keep the grindstone at the constant
rotation rate?
124. Zorch, an archenemy of Rotation Man, decides to
slow Earth’s rotation to once per 28.0 h by
exerting an opposing force at and parallel to the
equator. Rotation Man is not immediately
concerned, because he knows Zorch can only
exert a force of (a little greater
than a Saturn V rocket’s thrust). How long must
512 10 • Chapter Review
125. Zorch push with this force to accomplish his
goal? (This period gives Rotation Man time to
devote to other villains.)
A cord is wrapped around the rim of a solid cylinder
of radius 0.25 m, and a constant force of 40 N is
exerted on the cord shown, as shown in the
following figure. The cylinder is mounted on
frictionless bearings, and its moment of inertia is
. (a) Use the work energy theorem to
calculate the angular velocity of the cylinder after
5.0 m of cord have been removed. (b) If the 40-N
force is replaced by a 40-N weight, what is the
angular velocity of the cylinder after 5.0 m of cord
have unwound?
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 11
Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.1 A helicopter has its main lift blades rotating to keep the aircraft airborne. Due to conservation of angular momentum, the
body of the helicopter would want to rotate in the opposite sense to the blades, if it were not for the small rotor on the tail of the aircraft,
which provides thrust to stabilize it.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1 Rolling Motion
11.2 Angular Momentum
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
INTRODUCTION
Angular momentum is the rotational counterpart of linear momentum. Any massive object that
rotates about an axis carries angular momentum, including rotating flywheels, planets, stars, hurricanes, tornadoes,
whirlpools, and so on. The helicopter shown in the chapter-opening picture can be used to illustrate the concept of
angular momentum. The lift blades spin about a vertical axis through the main body and carry angular momentum.
The body of the helicopter tends to rotate in the opposite sense in order to conserve angular momentum. The small
rotors at the tail of the aircraft provide a counter thrust against the body to prevent this from happening, and the
helicopter stabilizes itself. The concept of conservation of angular momentum is discussed later in this chapter. In
the main part of this chapter, we explore the intricacies of angular momentum of rigid bodies such as a top, and also
of point particles and systems of particles. But to be complete, we start with a discussion of rolling motion, which
builds upon the concepts of the previous chapter.
514 11 • Angular Momentum
11.1 Rolling Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physics of rolling motion without slipping
• Explain how linear variables are related to angular variables for the case of rolling motion without slipping
• Find the linear and angular accelerations in rolling motion with and without slipping
• Calculate the static friction force associated with rolling motion without slipping
• Use energy conservation to analyze rolling motion
Rolling motion is that common combination of rotational and translational motion that we see everywhere, every
day. Think about the different situations of wheels moving on a car along a highway, or wheels on a plane landing on
a runway, or wheels on a robotic explorer on another planet. Understanding the forces and torques involved in
rolling motion is a crucial factor in many different types of situations.
For analyzing rolling motion in this chapter, refer to Figure 10.20 in Fixed-Axis Rotation to find moments of inertia of
some common geometrical objects. You may also find it useful in other calculations involving rotation.
Rolling Motion without Slipping
People have observed rolling motion without slipping ever since the invention of the wheel. For example, we can
look at the interaction of a car’s tires and the surface of the road. If the driver depresses the accelerator to the floor,
such that the tires spin without the car moving forward, there must be kinetic friction between the wheels and the
surface of the road. If the driver depresses the accelerator slowly, causing the car to move forward, then the tires
roll without slipping. It is surprising to most people that, in fact, the bottom of the wheel is at rest with respect to
the ground, indicating there must be static friction between the tires and the road surface. In Figure 11.2, the
bicycle is in motion with the rider staying upright. The tires have contact with the road surface, and, even though
they are rolling, the bottoms of the tires deform slightly, do not slip, and are at rest with respect to the road surface
for a measurable amount of time. There must be static friction between the tire and the road surface for this to be
so.
FIGURE 11.2 (a) The bicycle moves forward, and its tires do not slip. The bottom of the slightly deformed tire is at rest with respect to the
road surface for a measurable amount of time. (b) This image shows that the top of a rolling wheel appears blurred by its motion, but the
bottom of the wheel is instantaneously at rest. (credit a: modification of work by Nelson Lourenço; credit b: modification of work by Colin
Rose)
To analyze rolling without slipping, we first derive the linear variables of velocity and acceleration of the center of
mass of the wheel in terms of the angular variables that describe the wheel’s motion. The situation is shown in
Figure 11.3.
Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 • Rolling Motion 515
FIGURE 11.3 (a) A wheel is pulled across a horizontal surface by a force . The force of static friction keep it from slipping. (b) The linear velocity and acceleration vectors of the center of mass and the relevant expressions for is at rest relative to the surface. (c) Relative to the center of mass (CM) frame, point Phas linear velocity .
is large enough to
. Point P
From Figure 11.3(a), we see the force vectors involved in preventing the wheel from slipping. In (b), point Pthat
touches the surface is at rest relative to the surface. Relative to the center of mass, point Phas velocity ,
where Ris the radius of the wheel and is the wheel’s angular velocity about its axis. Since the wheel is rolling, the
velocity of Pwith respect to the surface is its velocity with respect to the center of mass plus the velocity of the
center of mass with respect to the surface:
Since the velocity of Prelative to the surface is zero, , this says that
11.1
Thus, the velocity of the wheel’s center of mass is its radius times the angular velocity about its axis. We show the
correspondence of the linear variable on the left side of the equation with the angular variable on the right side of
the equation. This is done below for the linear acceleration.
If we differentiate Equation 11.1 on the left side of the equation, we obtain an expression for the linear acceleration
of the center of mass. On the right side of the equation, Ris a constant and since we have
11.2
Furthermore, we can find the distance the wheel travels in terms of angular variables by referring to Figure 11.4. As
the wheel rolls from point Ato point B , its outer surface maps onto the ground by exactly the distance travelled,
which is We see from Figure 11.4 that the length of the outer surface that maps onto the ground is the arc
length . Equating the two distances, we obtain
11.3
FIGURE 11.4 As the wheel rolls on the surface, the arc length from Ato Bmaps onto the surface, corresponding to the distance
516 11 • Angular Momentum
that the center of mass has moved.
EXAMPLE 11.1
Rolling Down an Inclined Plane
A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane without slipping, starting from rest. It has mass m and radius r. (a) What
is its acceleration? (b) What condition must the coefficient of static friction satisfy so the cylinder does not slip?
Strategy
Draw a sketch and free-body diagram, and choose a coordinate system. We put x in the direction down the plane
and y upward perpendicular to the plane. Identify the forces involved. These are the normal force, the force of
gravity, and the force due to friction. Write down Newton’s laws in the x- and y-directions, and Newton’s law for
rotation, and then solve for the acceleration and force due to friction.
Solution
a. The free-body diagram and sketch are shown in Figure 11.5, including the normal force, components of the
weight, and the static friction force. There is barely enough friction to keep the cylinder rolling without
slipping. Since there is no slipping, the magnitude of the friction force is less than or equal to . Writing
down Newton’s laws in the x- and y-directions, we have
FIGURE 11.5 A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane without slipping from rest. The coordinate system has x in the direction
down the inclined plane and y perpendicular to the plane. The free-body diagram is shown with the normal force, the static friction
force, and the components of the weight . Friction makes the cylinder roll down the plane rather than slip.
Substituting in from the free-body diagram,
we can then solve for the linear acceleration of the center of mass from these equations:
However, it is useful to express the linear acceleration in terms of the moment of inertia. For this, we write
down Newton’s second law for rotation,
The torques are calculated about the axis through the center of mass of the cylinder. The only nonzero torque
is provided by the friction force. We have
Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 • Rolling Motion 517
Finally, the linear acceleration is related to the angular acceleration by
These equations can be used to solve for dropped the x-subscript. We rewrite and make the following substitutions.
in terms of the moment of inertia, where we have
in terms of the vertical component of gravity and the friction force,
From this we obtain
Note that this result is independent of the coefficient of static friction, .
Since we have a solid cylinder, from Figure 10.20, we have and
Therefore, we have
b. Because slipping does not occur, . Solving for the friction force,
Substituting this expression into the condition for no slipping, and noting that , we have
or
For the solid cylinder, this becomes
Significance
a. b. The linear acceleration is linearly proportional to Thus, the greater the angle of the incline, the greater
the linear acceleration, as would be expected. The angular acceleration, however, is linearly proportional to
and inversely proportional to the radius of the cylinder. Thus, the larger the radius, the smaller the
angular acceleration.
For no slipping to occur, the coefficient of static friction must be greater than or equal to . Thus, the
greater the angle of incline, the greater the coefficient of static friction must be to prevent the cylinder from
slipping.
518 11 • Angular Momentum
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.1
A hollow cylinder is on an incline at an angle of The coefficient of static friction on the surface is Does the cylinder roll without slipping? (b) Will a solid cylinder roll without slipping?
. (a)
It is worthwhile to repeat the equation derived in this example for the acceleration of an object rolling without
slipping:
11.4
This is a very useful equation for solving problems involving rolling without slipping. Note that the acceleration is
less than that of an object sliding down a frictionless plane with no rotation. The acceleration will also be different
for two rotating objects with different rotational inertias.
Rolling Motion with Slipping
In the case of rolling motion with slipping, we must use the coefficient of kinetic friction, which gives rise to the
kinetic friction force since static friction is not present. The situation is shown in Figure 11.6. In the case of slipping,
, because point Pon the wheel is not at rest on the surface, and . Thus,
.
FIGURE 11.6 (a) Kinetic friction arises between the wheel and the surface because the wheel is slipping. (b) The simple relationships
between the linear and angular variables are no longer valid.
EXAMPLE 11.2
Rolling Down an Inclined Plane with Slipping
A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane from rest and undergoes slipping (Figure 11.7). It has mass m and
radius r. (a) What is its linear acceleration? (b) What is its angular acceleration about an axis through the center of
mass?
Strategy
Draw a sketch and free-body diagram showing the forces involved. The free-body diagram is similar to the no-
slipping case except for the friction force, which is kinetic instead of static. Use Newton’s second law to solve for the
acceleration in the x-direction. Use Newton’s second law of rotation to solve for the angular acceleration.
Access for free at openstax.org
11.1 • Rolling Motion 519
Solution
FIGURE 11.7 A solid cylinder rolls down an inclined plane from rest and undergoes slipping. The coordinate system has x in the direction
down the inclined plane and y upward perpendicular to the plane. The free-body diagram shows the normal force, kinetic friction force, and
the components of the weight
The sum of the forces in the y-direction is zero, so the friction force is now
Newton’s second law in the x-direction becomes
or
The friction force provides the only torque about the axis through the center of mass, so Newton’s second law of
rotation becomes
Solving for , we have
Significance
We write the linear and angular accelerations in terms of the coefficient of kinetic friction. The linear acceleration is
the same as that found for an object sliding down an inclined plane with kinetic friction. The angular acceleration
about the axis of rotation is linearly proportional to the normal force, which depends on the cosine of the angle of
inclination. As , this force goes to zero, and, thus, the angular acceleration goes to zero.
Conservation of Mechanical Energy in Rolling Motion
In the preceding chapter, we introduced rotational kinetic energy. Any rolling object carries rotational kinetic energy,
as well as translational kinetic energy and potential energy if the system requires. Including the gravitational
potential energy, the total mechanical energy of an object rolling is
In the absence of any nonconservative forces that would take energy out of the system in the form of heat, the total
energy of a rolling object without slipping is conserved and is constant throughout the motion. Examples where
energy is not conserved are a rolling object that is slipping, production of heat as a result of kinetic friction, and a
rolling object encountering air resistance.
You may ask why a rolling object that is not slipping conserves energy, since the static friction force is
520 11 • Angular Momentum
nonconservative. The answer can be found by referring back to Figure 11.3. Point Pin contact with the surface is at
rest with respect to the surface. Therefore, its infinitesimal displacement with respect to the surface is zero, and
the incremental work done by the static friction force is zero. We can apply energy conservation to our study of
rolling motion to bring out some interesting results.
EXAMPLE 11.3
Curiosity Rover
The Curiosity rover, shown in Figure 11.8, was deployed on Mars on August 6, 2012. The wheels of the rover have a
radius of 25 cm. Suppose astronauts arrive on Mars in the year 2050 and find the now-inoperative Curiosity on the
side of a basin. While they are dismantling the rover, an astronaut accidentally loses a grip on one of the wheels,
which rolls without slipping down into the bottom of the basin 25 meters below. If the wheel has a mass of 5 kg,
what is its velocity at the bottom of the basin?
FIGURE 11.8 The NASA Mars Science Laboratory rover Curiosity during testing on June 3, 2011. The location is inside the Spacecraft
Assembly Facility at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. (credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech)
Strategy
We use mechanical energy conservation to analyze the problem. At the top of the hill, the wheel is at rest and has
only potential energy. At the bottom of the basin, the wheel has rotational and translational kinetic energy, which
must be equal to the initial potential energy by energy conservation. Since the wheel is rolling without slipping, we
use the relation to relate the translational variables to the rotational variables in the energy conservation
equation. We then solve for the velocity. From Figure 11.8, we see that a hollow cylinder is a good approximation for
the wheel, so we can use this moment of inertia to simplify the calculation.
Solution
Energy at the top of the basin equals energy at the bottom:
Access for free at openstax.org
11.2 • Angular Momentum 521
The known quantities are .
We rewrite the energy conservation equation eliminating by using We have
or
On Mars, the acceleration of gravity is basin as
which gives the magnitude of the velocity at the bottom of the
Significance
This is a fairly accurate result considering that Mars has very little atmosphere, and the loss of energy due to air
resistance would be minimal. The result also assumes that the terrain is smooth, such that the wheel wouldn’t
encounter rocks and bumps along the way.
Also, in this example, the kinetic energy, or energy of motion, is equally shared between linear and rotational
motion. If we look at the moments of inertia in Figure 10.20, we see that the hollow cylinder has the largest moment
of inertia for a given radius and mass. If the wheels of the rover were solid and approximated by solid cylinders, for
example, there would be more kinetic energy in linear motion than in rotational motion. This would give the wheel a
larger linear velocity than the hollow cylinder approximation. Thus, the solid cylinder would reach the bottom of the
basin faster than the hollow cylinder.
11.2 Angular Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the vector nature of angular momentum
• Find the total angular momentum and torque about a designated origin of a system of particles
• Calculate the angular momentum of a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis
• Calculate the torque on a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis
• Use conservation of angular momentum in the analysis of objects that change their rotation rate
Why does Earth keep on spinning? What started it spinning to begin with? Why doesn’t Earth’s gravitational
attraction not bring the Moon crashing in toward Earth? And how does an ice skater manage to spin faster and faster
simply by pulling her arms in? Why does she not have to exert a torque to spin faster?
Questions like these have answers based in angular momentum, the rotational analog to linear momentum. In this
chapter, we first define and then explore angular momentum from a variety of viewpoints. First, however, we
investigate the angular momentum of a single particle. This allows us to develop angular momentum for a system of
particles and for a rigid body that is cylindrically symmetric.
Angular Momentum of a Single Particle
Figure 11.9 shows a particle at a position with linear momentum with respect to the origin. Even if the
particle is not rotating about the origin, we can still define an angular momentum in terms of the position vector and
the linear momentum.
ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF A PARTICLE
The angular momentum of a particle is defined as the cross-product of and , and is perpendicular to the
522 11 • Angular Momentum
plane containing and
11.5
FIGURE 11.9 In three-dimensional space, the position vector momentum with respect to the origin is locates a particle in the xy-plane with linear momentum . The angular
, which is in the z-direction. The direction of is given by the right-hand rule, as shown.
The intent of choosing the direction of the angular momentum to be perpendicular to the plane containing and similar to choosing the direction of torque to be perpendicular to the plane of as discussed in Fixed-Axis
Rotation. The magnitude of the angular momentum is found from the definition of the cross-product,
is
where is the angle between and The units of angular momentum are .
As with the definition of torque, we can define a lever arm that is the perpendicular distance from the momentum
vector to the origin, With this definition, the magnitude of the angular momentum becomes
We see that if the direction of is such that it passes through the origin, then and the angular momentum is
zero because the lever arm is zero. In this respect, the magnitude of the angular momentum depends on the choice
of origin.
If we take the time derivative of the angular momentum, we arrive at an expression for the torque on the particle:
Here we have used the definition of law, and the fact that a vector crossed into itself is zero. From Newton’s second
the net force acting on the particle, and the definition of the net torque, we can write
11.6
Note the similarity with the linear result of Newton’s second law, strategy can serve as a guideline for calculating the angular momentum of a particle.
. The following problem-solving
Access for free at openstax.org
11.2 • Angular Momentum 523
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Angular Momentum of a Particle
1. 2. 3. 4. Choose a coordinate system about which the angular momentum is to be calculated.
Write down the radius vector to the point particle in unit vector notation.
Write the linear momentum vector of the particle in unit vector notation.
Take the cross product and use the right-hand rule to establish the direction of the angular
momentum vector.
5. See if there is a time dependence in the expression of the angular momentum vector. If there is, then a torque
exists about the origin, and use to calculate the torque. If there is no time dependence in the
expression for the angular momentum, then the net torque is zero.
EXAMPLE 11.4
Angular Momentum and Torque on a Meteor
A meteor enters Earth’s atmosphere (Figure 11.10) and is observed by someone on the ground before it burns up in
the atmosphere. The vector gives the position of the meteor with respect to the observer. At
the instant the observer sees the meteor, it has linear momentum , and it is accelerating at
a constant along its path, which for our purposes can be taken as a straight line. (a) What is the
angular momentum of the meteor about the origin, which is at the location of the observer? (b) What is the torque on
the meteor about the origin?
FIGURE 11.10 An observer on the ground sees a meteor at position with linear momentum .
Strategy
We resolve the acceleration into x- and y-components and use the kinematic equations to express the velocity as a
function of acceleration and time. We insert these expressions into the linear momentum and then calculate the
angular momentum using the cross-product. Since the position and momentum vectors are in the xy-plane, we
expect the angular momentum vector to be along the z-axis. To find the torque, we take the time derivative of the
angular momentum.
Solution
The meteor is entering Earth’s atmosphere at an angle of acceleration in the x- and y-directions are
below the horizontal, so the components of the
524 11 • Angular Momentum
We write the velocities using the kinematic equations.
a. The angular momentum is
At , the angular momentum of the meteor about the origin is
b. This is the instant that the observer sees the meteor.
To find the torque, we take the time derivative of the angular momentum. Taking the time derivative of function of time, which is the second equation immediately above, we have
as a
Then, since , we have
The units of torque are given as newton-meters, not to be confused with joules. As a check, we note that the
lever arm is the x-component of the vector in Figure 11.10 since it is perpendicular to the force acting on the
meteor, which is along its path. By Newton’s second law, this force is
The lever arm is
Thus, the torque is
Significance
Since the meteor is accelerating downward toward Earth, its radius and velocity vector are changing. Therefore,
since , the angular momentum is changing as a function of time. The torque on the meteor about the
origin, however, is constant, because the lever arm and the force on the meteor are constants. This example is
important in that it illustrates that the angular momentum depends on the choice of origin about which it is
calculated. The methods used in this example are also important in developing angular momentum for a system of
particles and for a rigid body.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.2
A proton spiraling around a magnetic field executes circular motion in the plane of the paper, as shown below. The
circular path has a radius of 0.4 m and the proton has velocity . What is the angular momentum of
the proton about the origin?
Access for free at openstax.org
11.2 • Angular Momentum 525
Angular Momentum of a System of Particles
The angular momentum of a system of particles is important in many scientific disciplines, one being astronomy.
Consider a spiral galaxy, a rotating island of stars like our own Milky Way. The individual stars can be treated as point
particles, each of which has its own angular momentum. The vector sum of the individual angular momenta give the
total angular momentum of the galaxy. In this section, we develop the tools with which we can calculate the total
angular momentum of a system of particles.
In the preceding section, we introduced the angular momentum of a single particle about a designated origin. The
expression for this angular momentum is where the vector is from the origin to the particle, and is
the particle’s linear momentum. If we have a system of Nparticles, each with position vector from the origin given
by and each having momentum then the total angular momentum of the system of particles about the origin is
the vector sum of the individual angular momenta about the origin. That is,
11.7
Similarly, if particle iis subject to a net torque due to the system of particles by differentiating Equation 11.7:
about the origin, then we can find the net torque about the origin
The sum of the individual torques produces a net external torque on the system, which we designate Thus,
11.8
Equation 11.8 states that the rat e of chang e of the t otal ang ular momentum of a s yst em is equal t o the net ext ernal
t or que acting on the s yst em when both quantities are measured with respect t o a given origin. Equation 11.8 can be
applied to any system that has net angular momentum, including rigid bodies, as discussed in the next section.
EXAMPLE 11.5
Angular Momentum of Three Particles
Referring to Figure 11.11(a), determine the total angular momentum due to the three particles about the origin. (b)
What is the rate of change of the angular momentum?
526 11 • Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.11 Three particles in the xy-plane with different position and momentum vectors.
Strategy
Write down the position and momentum vectors for the three particles. Calculate the individual angular momenta
and add them as vectors to find the total angular momentum. Then do the same for the torques.
Solution
a. Particle 1:
Particle 2: ,
Particle 3: ,
We add the individual angular momenta to find the total about the origin:
b. The individual forces and lever arms are
Therefore:
Significance
This example illustrates the superposition principle for angular momentum and torque of a system of particles. Care
must be taken when evaluating the radius vectors of the particles to calculate the angular momenta, and the lever
arms, to calculate the torques, as they are completely different quantities.
Access for free at openstax.org
11.2 • Angular Momentum 527
Angular Momentum of a Rigid Body
We have investigated the angular momentum of a single particle, which we generalized to a system of particles. Now
we can use the principles discussed in the previous section to develop the concept of the angular momentum of a
rigid body. Celestial objects such as planets have angular momentum due to their spin and orbits around stars. In
engineering, anything that rotates about an axis carries angular momentum, such as flywheels, propellers, and
rotating parts in engines. Knowledge of the angular momenta of these objects is crucial to the design of the system
in which they are a part.
To develop the angular momentum of a rigid body, we model a rigid body as being made up of small mass segments,
In Figure 11.12, a rigid body is constrained to rotate about the z-axis with angular velocity . All mass
segments that make up the rigid body undergo circular motion about the z-axis with the same angular velocity. Part
(a) of the figure shows mass segment with position vector from the origin and radius to the z-axis. The
magnitude of its tangential velocity is . Because the vectors are perpendicular to each other, the
magnitude of the angular momentum of this mass segment is
FIGURE 11.12 (a) A rigid body is constrained to rotate around the z-axis. The rigid body is symmetrical about the z-axis. A mass segment
is located at position which makes angle with respect to the z-axis. The circular motion of an infinitesimal mass segment is
shown. (b) is the angular momentum of the mass segment and has a component along the z-axis .
Using the right-hand rule, the angular momentum vector points in the direction shown in part (b). The sum of the
angular momenta of all the mass segments contains components both along and perpendicular to the axis of
rotation. Every mass segment has a perpendicular component of the angular momentum that will be cancelled by
the perpendicular component of an identical mass segment on the opposite side of the rigid body, because it is
cylindrically symmetric. Thus, the component along the axis of rotation is the only component that gives a nonzero
value when summed over all the mass segments. From part (b), the component of along the axis of rotation is
The net angular momentum of the rigid body along the axis of rotation is
528 11 • Angular Momentum
The summation is simply the moment of inertia Iof the rigid body about the axis of rotation. For a thin
hoop rotating about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the hoop, all of the ’s are equal to Rso the summation
reduces to which is the moment of inertia for a thin hoop found in Figure 10.20. Thus, the
magnitude of the angular momentum along the axis of rotation of a rigid body rotating with angular velocity about
the axis is
11.9
This equation is analogous to the magnitude of the linear momentum momentum vector is directed along the axis of rotation given by the right-hand rule.
. The direction of the angular
EXAMPLE 11.6
Angular Momentum of a Robot Arm
A robot arm on a Mars rover like Curiosity shown in Figure 11.8 is 1.0 m long and has forceps at the free end to pick
up rocks. The mass of the arm is 2.0 kg and the mass of the forceps is 1.0 kg. See Figure 11.13. The robot arm and
forceps move from rest to in 0.1 s. It rotates down and picks up a Mars rock that has mass 1.5 kg.
The axis of rotation is the point where the robot arm connects to the rover. (a) What is the angular momentum of the
robot arm by itself about the axis of rotation after 0.1 s when the arm has stopped accelerating? (b) What is the
angular momentum of the robot arm when it has the Mars rock in its forceps and is rotating upwards? (c) When the
arm does not have a rock in the forceps, what is the torque about the point where the arm connects to the rover
when it is accelerating from rest to its final angular velocity?
FIGURE 11.13 A robot arm on a Mars rover swings down and picks up a Mars rock. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech)
Strategy
We use Equation 11.9 to find angular momentum in the various configurations. When the arm is rotating downward,
the right-hand rule gives the angular momentum vector directed out of the page, which we will call the positive
z-direction. When the arm is rotating upward, the right-hand rule gives the direction of the angular momentum
vector into the page or in the negative z-direction. The moment of inertia is the sum of the individual moments of
inertia. The arm can be approximated with a solid rod, and the forceps and Mars rock can be approximated as point
masses located at a distance of 1 m from the origin. For part (c), we use Newton’s second law of motion for rotation
to find the torque on the robot arm.
Access for free at openstax.org
11.3 • Conservation of Angular Momentum 529
Solution
a. Writing down the individual moments of inertia, we have
Robot arm:
Forceps:
Mars rock:
Therefore, without the Mars rock, the total moment of inertia is
and the magnitude of the angular momentum is
b. The angular momentum vector is directed out of the page in the counterclockwise.
We must include the Mars rock in the calculation of the moment of inertia, so we have
direction since the robot arm is rotating
and
c. Now the angular momentum vector is directed into the page in the direction, by the right-hand rule, since
the robot arm is now rotating clockwise.
We find the torque when the arm does not have the rock by taking the derivative of the angular momentum
using Equation 11.8 But since , and understanding that the direction of the angular
momentum and torque vectors are along the axis of rotation, we can suppress the vector notation and find
which is Newton’s second law for rotation. Since , we can calculate the net torque:
Significance
The angular momentum in (a) is less than that of (b) due to the fact that the moment of inertia in (b) is greater than
(a), while the angular velocity is the same.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.3
Which has greater angular momentum: a solid sphere of mass m rotating at a constant angular frequency the z-axis, or a solid cylinder of same mass and rotation rate about the z-axis?
about
INTERACTIVE
Visit the University of Colorado’s Interactive Simulation of Angular Momentum (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21angmomintsim) to learn more about angular momentum.
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply conservation of angular momentum to determine the angular velocity of a rotating system in which
the moment of inertia is changing
• Explain how the rotational kinetic energy changes when a system undergoes changes in both moment of
inertia and angular velocity
530 11 • Angular Momentum
So far, we have looked at the angular momentum of systems consisting of point particles and rigid bodies. We have
also analyzed the torques involved, using the expression that relates the external net torque to the change in
angular momentum, Equation 11.8. Examples of systems that obey this equation include a freely spinning bicycle
tire that slows over time due to torque arising from friction, or the slowing of Earth’s rotation over millions of years
due to frictional forces exerted on tidal deformations.
However, suppose there is no net external torque on the system, law of conservation of angular momentum.
In this case, Equation 11.8 becomes the
LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM
The angular momentum of a system of particles around a point in a fixed inertial reference frame is conserved if
there is no net external torque around that point:
11.10
or
11.11
Note that the t otalangular momentum is conserved. Any of the individual angular momenta can change as long as
their sum remains constant. This law is analogous to linear momentum being conserved when the external force on
a system is zero.
As an example of conservation of angular momentum, Figure 11.14 shows an ice skater executing a spin. The net
torque on her is very close to zero because there is relatively little friction between her skates and the ice. Also, the
friction is exerted very close to the pivot point. Both are small, so is negligible. Consequently, she can
spin for quite some time. She can also increase her rate of spin by pulling her arms and legs in. Why does pulling her
arms and legs in increase her rate of spin? The answer is that her angular momentum is constant, so that
or
where the primed quantities refer to conditions after she has pulled in her arms and reduced her moment of inertia.
Because is smaller, the angular velocity must increase to keep the angular momentum constant.
Access for free at openstax.org
11.3 • Conservation of Angular Momentum 531
FIGURE 11.14 (a) An ice skater is spinning on the tip of her skate with her arms extended. Her angular momentum is conserved because
the net torque on her is negligibly small. (b) Her rate of spin increases greatly when she pulls in her arms, decreasing her moment of inertia.
The work she does to pull in her arms results in an increase in rotational kinetic energy.
It is interesting to see how the rotational kinetic energy of the skater changes when she pulls her arms in. Her initial
rotational energy is
whereas her final rotational energy is
Since we can substitute for and find
Because her moment of inertia has decreased, her final rotational kinetic energy has increased. The source
of this additional rotational kinetic energy is the work required to pull her arms inward. Note that the skater’s arms
do not move in a perfect circle—they spiral inward. This work causes an increase in the rotational kinetic energy,
while her angular momentum remains constant. Since she is in a frictionless environment, no energy escapes the
system. Thus, if she were to extend her arms to their original positions, she would rotate at her original angular
velocity and her kinetic energy would return to its original value.
The solar system is another example of how conservation of angular momentum works in our universe. Our solar
system was born from a huge cloud of gas and dust that initially had rotational energy. Gravitational forces caused
the cloud to contract, and the rotation rate increased as a result of conservation of angular momentum (Figure
11.15).
532 11 • Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.15 The solar system coalesced from a cloud of gas and dust that was originally rotating. The orbital motions and spins of the
planets are in the same direction as the original spin and conserve the angular momentum of the parent cloud. (credit: modification of work
by NASA)
We continue our discussion with an example that has applications to engineering.
EXAMPLE 11.7
Coupled Flywheels
A flywheel rotates without friction at an angular velocity on a frictionless, vertical shaft of
negligible rotational inertia. A second flywheel, which is at rest and has a moment of inertia three times that of the
rotating flywheel, is dropped onto it (Figure 11.16). Because friction exists between the surfaces, the flywheels very
quickly reach the same rotational velocity, after which they spin together. (a) Use the law of conservation of angular
momentum to determine the angular velocity of the combination. (b) What fraction of the initial kinetic energy is
lost in the coupling of the flywheels?
Access for free at openstax.org
11.3 • Conservation of Angular Momentum 533
FIGURE 11.16 Two flywheels are coupled and rotate together.
Strategy
Part (a) is straightforward to solve for the angular velocity of the coupled system. We use the result of (a) to compare
the initial and final kinetic energies of the system in part (b).
Solution
a. No external torques act on the system. The force due to friction produces an internal torque, which does not
affect the angular momentum of the system. Therefore conservation of angular momentum gives
b. Before contact, only one flywheel is rotating. The rotational kinetic energy of this flywheel is the initial rotational
kinetic energy of the system, . The final kinetic energy is
Therefore, the ratio of the final kinetic energy to the initial kinetic energy is
Thus, 3/4 of the initial kinetic energy is lost to the coupling of the two flywheels.
Significance
Since the rotational inertia of the system increased, the angular velocity decreased, as expected from the law of
conservation of angular momentum. In this example, we see that the final kinetic energy of the system has
decreased, as energy is lost to the coupling of the flywheels. Compare this to the example of the skater in Figure
11.14 doing work to bring her arms inward and adding rotational kinetic energy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.4
A merry-go-round at a playground is rotating at 4.0 rev/min. Three children jump on and increase the moment of
inertia of the merry-go-round/children rotating system by . What is the new rotation rate?
EXAMPLE 11.8
Dismount from a High Bar
An 80.0-kg gymnast dismounts from a high bar. He starts the dismount at full extension, then tucks to complete a
number of revolutions before landing. His moment of inertia when fully extended can be approximated as a rod of
length 1.8 m and when in the tuck a rod of half that length. If his rotation rate at full extension is 1.0 rev/s and he
enters the tuck when his center of mass is at 3.0 m height moving horizontally to the floor, how many revolutions
can he execute if he comes out of the tuck at 1.8 m height? See Figure 11.17.
534 11 • Angular Momentum
FIGURE 11.17 A gymnast dismounts from a high bar and executes a number of revolutions in the tucked position before landing upright.
Strategy
Using conservation of angular momentum, we can find his rotation rate when in the tuck. Using the equations of
kinematics, we can find the time interval from a height of 3.0 m to 1.8 m. Since he is moving horizontally with
respect to the ground, the equations of free fall simplify. This will allow the number of revolutions that can be
executed to be calculated. Since we are using a ratio, we can keep the units as rev/s and don’t need to convert to
radians/s.
Solution
The moment of inertia at full extension is .
The moment of inertia in the tuck is .
Conservation of angular momentum: .
Time interval in the tuck: .
In 0.5 s, he will be able to execute two revolutions at 4.0 rev/s.
Significance
Note that the number of revolutions he can complete will depend on how long he is in the air. In the problem, he is
exiting the high bar horizontally to the ground. He could also exit at an angle with respect to the ground, giving him
more or less time in the air depending on the angle, positive or negative, with respect to the ground. Gymnasts must
take this into account when they are executing their dismounts.
EXAMPLE 11.9
Conservation of Angular Momentum of a Collision
A bullet of mass is moving horizontally with a speed of The bullet strikes and becomes
embedded in the edge of a solid disk of mass and radius The cylinder is free to rotate
around its axis and is initially at rest (Figure 11.18). What is the angular velocity of the disk immediately after the
bullet is embedded?
Access for free at openstax.org
11.4 • Precession of a Gyroscope 535
FIGURE 11.18 A bullet is fired horizontally and becomes embedded in the edge of a disk that is free to rotate about its vertical axis.
Strategy
For the system of the bullet and the cylinder, no external torque acts along the vertical axis through the center of the
disk. Thus, the angular momentum along this axis is conserved. The initial angular momentum of the bullet is ,
which is taken about the rotational axis of the disk the moment before the collision. The initial angular momentum of
the cylinder is zero. Thus, the net angular momentum of the system is . Since angular momentum is conserved,
the initial angular momentum of the system is equal to the angular momentum of the bullet embedded in the disk
immediately after impact.
Solution
The initial angular momentum of the system is
The moment of inertia of the system with the bullet embedded in the disk is
The final angular momentum of the system is
Thus, by conservation of angular momentum, and
Solving for
Significance
The system is composed of both a point particle and a rigid body. Care must be taken when formulating the angular
momentum before and after the collision. Just before impact the angular momentum of the bullet is taken about the
rotational axis of the disk.
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physical processes underlying the phenomenon of precession
• Calculate the precessional angular velocity of a gyroscope
Figure 11.19 shows a gyroscope, defined as a spinning disk in which the axis of rotation is free to assume any
orientation. When spinning, the orientation of the spin axis is unaffected by the orientation of the body that encloses
536 11 • Angular Momentum
it. The body or vehicle enclosing the gyroscope can be moved from place to place and the orientation of the spin axis
will remain the same. This makes gyroscopes very useful in navigation, especially where magnetic compasses can’t
be used, such as in piloted and unpiloted spacecrafts, intercontinental ballistic missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles,
and satellites like the Hubble Space Telescope.
FIGURE 11.19 A gyroscope consists of a spinning disk about an axis that is free to assume any orientation.
We illustrate the precession of a gyroscope with an example of a top in the next two figures. If the top is placed on a
flat surface near the surface of Earth at an angle to the vertical and is not spinning, it will fall over, due to the force of
gravity producing a torque acting on its center of mass. This is shown in Figure 11.20(a). However, if the top is
spinning on its axis, rather than topple over due to this torque, it precesses about the vertical, shown in part (b) of
the figure. This is due to the torque on the center of mass, which provides the change in angular momentum.
FIGURE 11.20 (a) If the top is not spinning, there is a torque its axis it doesn’t fall over but precesses about the z-axis.
about the origin, and the top falls over. (b) If the top is spinning about
Figure 11.21 shows the forces acting on a spinning top. The torque produced is perpendicular to the angular
momentum vector. This changes the direction of the angular momentum vector according to magnitude. The top precesses around a vertical axis, since the torque is always horizontal and perpendicular to but not its
. If
the top is notspinning, it acquires angular momentum in the direction of the torque, and it rotates around a
horizontal axis, falling over just as we would expect.
Access for free at openstax.org
11.4 • Precession of a Gyroscope 537
FIGURE 11.21 The force of gravity acting on the center of mass produces a torque in the direction perpendicular to The magnitude of
doesn’t change but its direction does, and the top precesses about the z-axis.
We can experience this phenomenon first hand by holding a spinning bicycle wheel and trying to rotate it about an
axis perpendicular to the spin axis. As shown in Figure 11.22, the person applies forces perpendicular to the spin
axis in an attempt to rotate the wheel, but instead, the wheel axis starts to change direction to her left due to the
applied torque.
FIGURE 11.22 (a) A person holding the spinning bike wheel lifts it with her right hand and pushes down with her left hand in an attempt to
rotate the wheel. This action creates a torque directly toward her. This torque causes a change in angular momentum in exactly the
same direction. (b) A vector diagram depicting how add, producing a new angular momentum pointing more toward the person.
538 11 • Angular Momentum
The wheel moves toward the person, perpendicular to the forces she exerts on it.
We all know how easy it is for a bicycle to tip over when sitting on it at rest. But when riding the bicycle at a good
pace, tipping it over involves changing the angular momentum vector of the spinning wheels.
INTERACTIVE
View the video on gyroscope precession (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21gyrovideo) for a complete demonstration of
precession of the bicycle wheel.
Also, when a spinning disk is put in a box such as a Blu-Ray player, try to move it. It is easy to translate the box in a
given direction but difficult to rotate it about an axis perpendicular to the axis of the spinning disk, since we are
putting a torque on the box that will cause the angular momentum vector of the spinning disk to precess.
We can calculate the precession rate of the top in Figure 11.21. From Figure 11.21, we see that the magnitude of
the torque is
Thus,
The angle the top precesses through in time dtis
The precession angular velocity is and from this equation we see that
11.12
In this derivation, we assumed that that is, that the precession angular velocity is much less than the
angular velocity of the gyroscope disk. The precession angular velocity adds a small component to the angular
momentum along the z-axis. This is seen in a slight bob up and down as the gyroscope precesses, referred to as
nutation.
Earth itself acts like a gigantic gyroscope. Its angular momentum is along its axis and currently points at Polaris, the
North Star. But Earth is slowly precessing (once in about 26,000 years) due to the torque of the Sun and the Moon
on its nonspherical shape.
EXAMPLE 11.10
Period of Precession
A gyroscope spins with its tip on the ground and is spinning with negligible frictional resistance. The disk of the
gyroscope has mass 0.3 kg and is spinning at 20 rev/s. Its center of mass is 5.0 cm from the pivot and the radius of
the disk is 5.0 cm. What is the precessional period of the gyroscope?
Strategy
We use Equation 11.12 to find the precessional angular velocity of the gyroscope. This allows us to find the period of
precession.
Solution
The moment of inertia of the disk is
Access for free at openstax.org
11.4 • Precession of a Gyroscope 539
The angular velocity of the disk is
We can now substitute in Equation 11.12. The precessional angular velocity is
The precessional period of the gyroscope is
Significance
The precessional angular frequency of the gyroscope, 3.12 rad/s, or about 0.5 rev/s, is much less than the angular
velocity 20 rev/s of the gyroscope disk. Therefore, we don’t expect a large component of the angular momentum to
arise due to precession, and Equation 11.12 is a good approximation of the precessional angular velocity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 11.5
A top has a precession frequency of 5.0 rad/s on Earth. What is its precession frequency on the Moon?
540 11 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
angular momentum rotational analog of linear
momentum, found by taking the product of moment
of inertia and angular velocity
law of conservation of angular momentum angular
momentum is conserved, that is, the initial angular
momentum is equal to the final angular momentum
Key Equations
Velocity of center of mass of rolling object
Acceleration of center of mass of rolling object
Displacement of center of mass of rolling object
Acceleration of an object rolling without slipping
Angular momentum
Derivative of angular momentum equals torque
Angular momentum of a system of particles
For a system of particles, derivative of angular
momentum equals torque
Angular momentum of a rotating rigid body
Conservation of angular momentum
Conservation of angular momentum
Precessional angular velocity
Summary
11.1 Rolling Motion
• In rolling motion without slipping, a static friction
force is present between the rolling object and
the surface. The relations
all
apply, such that the linear velocity, acceleration,
and distance of the center of mass are the
angular variables multiplied by the radius of the
object.
• In rolling motion with slipping, a kinetic friction
force arises between the rolling object and the
surface. In this case,
.
• Energy conservation can be used to analyze
rolling motion. Energy is conserved in rolling
motion without slipping. Energy is not conserved
in rolling motion with slipping due to the heat
generated by kinetic friction.
11.2 Angular Momentum
• The angular momentum of a single
particle about a designated origin is the vector
Access for free at openstax.org
when no external torque is applied to the system
precession circular motion of the pole of the axis of a
spinning object around another axis due to a torque
rolling motion combination of rotational and
translational motion with or without slipping
product of the position vector in the given
coordinate system and the particle’s linear
momentum.
• The angular momentum of a system of
particles about a designated origin is the vector
sum of the individual momenta of the particles
that make up the system.
• The net torque on a system about a given origin is
the time derivative of the angular momentum
about that origin: .
• A rigid rotating body has angular momentum
directed along the axis of rotation. The
time derivative of the angular momentum
gives the net torque on a rigid body
and is directed along the axis of rotation.
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
• In the absence of external torques, a system’s
total angular momentum is conserved. This is the
rotational counterpart to linear momentum being
conserved when the external force on a system is
zero.
• For a rigid body that changes its angular
momentum in the absence of a net external
torque, conservation of angular momentum gives
. This equation says that the
angular velocity is inversely proportional to the
moment of inertia. Thus, if the moment of inertia
decreases, the angular velocity must increase to
conserve angular momentum.
• Systems containing both point particles and rigid
bodies can be analyzed using conservation of
angular momentum. The angular momentum of
all bodies in the system must be taken about a
common axis.
3. 4. 5. Conceptual Questions
11.1 Rolling Motion
1. Can a round object released from rest at the top
of a frictionless incline undergo rolling motion?
2. A cylindrical can of radius Ris rolling across a
horizontal surface without slipping. (a) After one
complete revolution of the can, what is the
distance that its center of mass has moved? (b)
Would this distance be greater or smaller if
slipping occurred?
A wheel is released from the top on an incline. Is
the wheel most likely to slip if the incline is
steep or gently sloped?
Which rolls down an inclined plane faster, a
hollow cylinder or a solid sphere? Both have the
same mass and radius.
A hollow sphere and a hollow cylinder of the
same radius and mass roll up an incline without
slipping and have the same initial center of mass
velocity. Which object reaches a greater height
before stopping?
11.2 Angular Momentum
Can you assign an angular momentum to a
particle without first defining a reference point?
For a particle traveling in a straight line, are
there any points about which the angular
momentum is zero? Assume the line intersects
the origin.
Under what conditions does a rigid body have
angular momentum but not linear momentum?
If a particle is moving with respect to a chosen
6. 7. 8. 9. 11 • Chapter Review 541
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
• When a gyroscope is set on a pivot near the
surface of Earth, it precesses around a vertical
axis, since the torque is always horizontal and
perpendicular to If the gyroscope is not
spinning, it acquires angular momentum in the
direction of the torque, and it rotates about a
horizontal axis, falling over just as we would
expect.
• The precessional angular velocity is given by
, where r is the distance from the
pivot to the center of mass of the gyroscope, Iis
the moment of inertia of the gyroscope’s spinning
disk, Mis its mass, and is the angular
frequency of the gyroscope disk.
origin it has linear momentum. What conditions
must exist for this particle’s angular momentum
to be zero about the chosen origin?
10. If you know the velocity of a particle, can you
say anything about the particle’s angular
momentum?
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
11. What is the purpose of the small propeller at the
back of a helicopter that rotates in the plane
perpendicular to the large propeller?
12. Suppose a child walks from the outer edge of a
rotating merry-go-round to the inside. Does the
angular velocity of the merry-go-round increase,
decrease, or remain the same? Explain your
answer. Assume the merry-go-round is spinning
without friction.
As the rope of a tethered ball winds around a
pole, what happens to the angular velocity of the
ball?
Suppose the polar ice sheets broke free and
floated toward Earth’s equator without melting.
What would happen to Earth’s angular velocity?
Explain why stars spin faster when they
collapse.
Competitive divers pull their limbs in and curl up
their bodies when they do flips. Just before entering
the water, they fully extend their limbs to enter
straight down (see below). Explain the effect of both
actions on their angular velocities. Also explain the
effect on their angular momentum.
13. 14. 15. 16. 
542 11 • Chapter Review
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
17. Gyroscopes used in guidance systems to
indicate directions in space must have an
angular momentum that does not change in
direction. When placed in the vehicle, they are
put in a compartment that is separated from the
main fuselage, such that changes in the
orientation of the fuselage does not affect the
orientation of the gyroscope. If the space vehicle
is subjected to large forces and accelerations
how can the direction of the gyroscopes angular
momentum be constant at all times?
18. Earth precesses about its vertical axis with a
period of 26,000 years. Discuss whether
Equation 11.12 can be used to calculate the
precessional angular velocity of Earth.
20. 21. Problems
11.1 Rolling Motion
19. What is the angular velocity of a 75.0-cm-
diameter tire on an automobile traveling at 90.0
km/h?
A boy rides his bicycle 2.00 km. The wheels have
radius 30.0 cm. What is the total angle the tires
rotate through during his trip?
If the boy on the bicycle in the preceding
problem accelerates from rest to a speed of 10.0
m/s in 10.0 s, what is the angular acceleration of
the tires?
Formula One race cars have 66-cm-diameter
tires. If a Formula One averages a speed of 300
km/h during a race, what is the angular
displacement in revolutions of the wheels if the
race car maintains this speed for 1.5 hours?
A marble rolls down an incline at from rest.
(a) What is its acceleration? (b) How far does it
go in 3.0 s?
Repeat the preceding problem replacing the
marble with a solid cylinder. Explain the new
result.
A rigid body with a cylindrical cross-section is
released from the top of a incline. It rolls
26. 10.0 m to the bottom in 2.60 s. Find the moment
of inertia of the body in terms of its mass m and
radius r .
A yo-yo can be thought of a solid cylinder of
mass m and radius r that has a light string
wrapped around its circumference (see below).
One end of the string is held fixed in space. If the
cylinder falls as the string unwinds without
slipping, what is the acceleration of the cylinder?
22. 23. 27. 24. 25. 28. A solid cylinder of radius 10.0 cm rolls down an
incline with slipping. The angle of the incline is
The coefficient of kinetic friction on the
surface is 0.400. What is the angular
acceleration of the solid cylinder? What is the
linear acceleration?
A bowling ball rolls up a ramp 0.5 m high without
slipping to storage. It has an initial velocity of its
Access for free at openstax.org
29. 30. 31. 32. center of mass of 3.0 m/s. (a) What is its velocity
at the top of the ramp? (b) If the ramp is 1 m
high does it make it to the top?
A 40.0-kg solid cylinder is rolling across a
horizontal surface at a speed of 6.0 m/s. How
much work is required to stop it?
A 40.0-kg solid sphere is rolling across a
horizontal surface with a speed of 6.0 m/s. How
much work is required to stop it? Compare
results with the preceding problem.
A solid cylinder rolls up an incline at an angle of
If it starts at the bottom with a speed of 10
m/s, how far up the incline does it travel?
A solid cylindrical wheel of mass Mand radius R
is pulled by a force applied to the center of the
wheel at to the horizontal (see the following
figure). If the wheel is to roll without slipping,
what is the maximum value of The
coefficients of static and kinetic friction are
33. A hollow cylinder that is rolling without slipping
is given an initial velocity and rolls up an incline
to a vertical height of 1.0 m. If a hollow sphere
of the same mass and radius is given the same
initial velocity, how high vertically does it roll up
the incline?
11.2 Angular Momentum
34. A 0.2-kg particle is travelling along the line
with a velocity . What is the
angular momentum of the particle about the
origin?
A bird flies overhead from where you stand at an
altitude of 300.0 m and at a speed horizontal to
the ground of 20.0 m/s. The bird has a mass of
2.0 kg. The radius vector to the bird makes an
35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 11 • Chapter Review 543
angle with respect to the ground. The radius
vector to the bird and its momentum vector lie in
the xy-plane. What is the bird’s angular
momentum about the point where you are
standing?
A Formula One race car with mass 750.0 kg is
speeding through a course in Monaco and enters
a circular turn at 220.0 km/h in the
counterclockwise direction about the origin of
the circle. At another part of the course, the car
enters a second circular turn at 180 km/h also in
the counterclockwise direction. If the radius of
curvature of the first turn is 130.0 m and that of
the second is 100.0 m, compare the angular
momenta of the race car in each turn taken
about the origin of the circular turn.
A particle of mass 5.0 kg has position vector
at a particular instant of
time when its velocity is with
respect to the origin. (a) What is the angular
momentum of the particle? (b) If a force
acts on the particle at this instant,
what is the torque about the origin?
Use the right-hand rule to determine the
directions of the angular momenta about the
origin of the particles as shown below. The
z-axis is out of the page.
Suppose the particles in the preceding problem
have masses
. The velocities of the particles are
, ,
, . (a) Calculate
the angular momentum of each particle about
the origin. (b) What is the total angular
momentum of the four-particle system about the
origin?
Two particles of equal mass travel with the same
544 11 • Chapter Review
speed in opposite directions along parallel lines
separated by a distance d . Show that the angular
momentum of this two-particle system is the
same no matter what point is used as the
reference for calculating the angular
momentum.
41. An airplane of mass flies
horizontally at an altitude of 10 km with a
constant speed of 250 m/s relative to Earth. (a)
What is the magnitude of the airplane’s angular
momentum relative to a ground observer
directly below the plane? (b) Does the angular
momentum change as the airplane flies along a
constant altitude?
42. 43. At a particular instant, a 1.0-kg particle’s
position is , its
velocity is , and
the force on it is . (a)
What is the angular momentum of the particle
about the origin? (b) What is the torque on the
particle about the origin? (c) What is the time
rate of change of the particle’s angular
momentum at this instant?
A particle of mass m is dropped at the point
and falls vertically in Earth’s gravitational
field (a) What is the expression for the
angular momentum of the particle around the
z-axis, which points directly out of the page as
shown below? (b) Calculate the torque on the
particle around the z-axis. (c) Is the torque equal
to the time rate of change of the angular
momentum?
44. 45. (a) Calculate the angular momentum of Earth in
its orbit around the Sun. (b) Compare this
angular momentum with the angular momentum
of Earth about its axis.
A boulder of mass 20 kg and radius 20 cm rolls
down a hill 15 m high from rest. What is its
angular momentum when it is half way down the
hill? (b) At the bottom?
Access for free at openstax.org
46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. A satellite is spinning at 6.0 rev/s. The satellite
consists of a main body in the shape of a sphere
of radius 2.0 m and mass 10,000 kg, and two
antennas projecting out from the center of mass
of the main body that can be approximated with
rods of length 3.0 m each and mass 10 kg. The
antenna’s lie in the plane of rotation. What is the
angular momentum of the satellite?
A propeller consists of two blades each 3.0 m in
length and mass 120 kg each. The propeller can
be approximated by a single rod rotating about
its center of mass. The propeller starts from rest
and rotates up to 1200 rpm in 30 seconds at a
constant rate. (a) What is the angular
momentum of the propeller at
(b) What is the torque on the
propeller?
A pulsar is a rapidly rotating neutron star. The
Crab nebula pulsar in the constellation Taurus
has a period of , radius 10.0 km,
and mass The pulsar’s
rotational period will increase over time due to
the release of electromagnetic radiation, which
doesn’t change its radius but reduces its
rotational energy. (a) What is the angular
momentum of the pulsar? (b) Suppose the
angular velocity decreases at a rate of
. What is the torque on the pulsar?
The blades of a wind turbine are 30 m in length
and rotate at a maximum rotation rate of 20 rev/
min. (a) If the blades are 6000 kg each and the
rotor assembly has three blades, calculate the
angular momentum of the turbine at this
rotation rate. (b) What is the torque require to
rotate the blades up to the maximum rotation
rate in 5 minutes?
A roller coaster has mass 3000.0 kg and needs
to make it safely through a vertical circular loop
of radius 50.0 m. What is the minimum angular
momentum of the coaster at the bottom of the
loop to make it safely through? Neglect friction
on the track. Take the coaster to be a point
particle.
A mountain biker takes a jump in a race and goes
airborne. The mountain bike is travelling at 10.0
m/s before it goes airborne. If the mass of the
front wheel on the bike is 750 g and has radius
35 cm, what is the angular momentum of the
spinning wheel in the air the moment the bike
leaves the ground?
11.3 Conservation of Angular Momentum
52. A disk of mass 2.0 kg and radius 60 cm with a
small mass of 0.05 kg attached at the edge is
rotating at 2.0 rev/s. The small mass, while
attached to the disk, slides gradually to the
center of the disk. What is the disk’s final
rotation rate?
53. The Sun’s mass is its radius is
and it has a rotational period of
approximately 28 days. If the Sun should
collapse into a white dwarf of radius
what would its period be if no
mass were ejected and a sphere of uniform
density can model the Sun both before and
after?
54. 55. 56. A cylinder with rotational inertia
rotates clockwise about a
vertical axis through its center with angular
speed A second cylinder with
rotational inertia rotates
counterclockwise about the same axis with
angular speed . If the cylinders
couple so they have the same rotational axis
what is the angular speed of the combination?
What percentage of the original kinetic energy is
lost to friction?
A diver off the high board imparts an initial
rotation with their body fully extended before
going into a tuck and executing three back
somersaults before hitting the water. If their
moment of inertia before the tuck is
and after the tuck during the
somersaults is , what rotation rate
must the diver impart to their body directly off
the board and before the tuck if they take 1.4 s
to execute the somersaults before hitting the
water?
An Earth satellite has its apogee at 2500 km
above the surface of Earth and perigee at 500
km above the surface of Earth. At apogee its
speed is 6260 m/s. What is its speed at perigee?
Earth’s radius is 6370 km (see below).
11 • Chapter Review 545
57. A Molniya orbit is a highly eccentric orbit of a
communication satellite so as to provide continuous
communications coverage for Scandinavian
countries and adjacent Russia. The orbit is
positioned so that these countries have the satellite
in view for extended periods in time (see below). If a
satellite in such an orbit has an apogee at 40,000.0
km as measured from the center of Earth and a
velocity of 1.68 km/s, what would be its velocity at
perigee measured at 200.0 km altitude?
58. Shown below is a small particle of mass 20 g
that is moving at a speed of 10.0 m/s when it
collides and sticks to the edge of a uniform solid
cylinder. The cylinder is free to rotate about its
axis through its center and is perpendicular to
the page. The cylinder has a mass of 0.5 kg and
a radius of 10 cm, and is initially at rest. (a) What
is the angular velocity of the system after the
546 11 • Chapter Review
collision? (b) How much kinetic energy is lost in
the collision?
59. 60. 61. 62. 63. A bug of mass 0.020 kg is at rest on the edge of
a solid cylindrical disk
rotating in a
horizontal plane around the vertical axis through
its center. The disk is rotating at 10.0 rad/s. The
bug crawls to the center of the disk. (a) What is
the new angular velocity of the disk? (b) What is
the change in the kinetic energy of the system?
(c) If the bug crawls back to the outer edge of
the disk, what is the angular velocity of the disk
then? (d) What is the new kinetic energy of the
system? (e) What is the cause of the increase
and decrease of kinetic energy?
A uniform rod of mass 200 g and length 100 cm
is free to rotate in a horizontal plane around a
fixed vertical axis through its center,
perpendicular to its length. Two small beads,
each of mass 20 g, are mounted in grooves along
the rod. Initially, the two beads are held by
catches on opposite sides of the rod’s center, 10
cm from the axis of rotation. With the beads in
this position, the rod is rotating with an angular
velocity of 10.0 rad/s. When the catches are
released, the beads slide outward along the rod.
(a) What is the rod’s angular velocity when the
beads reach the ends of the rod? (b) What is the
rod’s angular velocity if the beads fly off the rod?
A merry-go-round has a radius of 2.0 m and a
moment of inertia A boy of mass 50
kg runs tangent to the rim at a speed of 4.0 m/s
and jumps on. If the merry-go-round is initially
at rest, what is the angular velocity after the boy
jumps on?
A playground merry-go-round has a mass of 120
kg and a radius of 1.80 m and it is rotating with
an angular velocity of 0.500 rev/s. What is its
angular velocity after a 22.0-kg child gets onto it
by grabbing its outer edge? The child is initially
at rest.
Three children are riding on the edge of a merry-
Access for free at openstax.org
64. 65. 66. 67. go-round that is 100 kg, has a 1.60-m radius,
and is spinning at 20.0 rpm. The children have
masses of 22.0, 28.0, and 33.0 kg. If the child
who has a mass of 28.0 kg moves to the center
of the merry-go-round, what is the new angular
velocity in rpm?
(a) Calculate the angular momentum of an ice
skater spinning at 6.00 rev/s given his moment
of inertia is . (b) He reduces his
rate of spin (his angular velocity) by extending
his arms and increasing his moment of inertia.
Find the value of his moment of inertia if his
angular velocity decreases to 1.25 rev/s. (c)
Suppose instead he keeps his arms in and allows
friction of the ice to slow him to 3.00 rev/s. What
average torque was exerted if this takes 15.0 s?
Twin skaters approach one another as shown below
and lock hands. (a) Calculate their final angular
velocity, given each had an initial speed of 2.50 m/s
relative to the ice. Each has a mass of 70.0 kg, and
each has a center of mass located 0.800 m from
their locked hands. You may approximate their
moments of inertia to be that of point masses at this
radius. (b) Compare the initial kinetic energy and
final kinetic energy.
A baseball catcher extends his arm straight up to
catch a fast ball with a speed of 40 m/s. The
baseball is 0.145 kg and the catcher’s arm
length is 0.5 m and mass 4.0 kg. (a) What is the
angular velocity of the arm immediately after
catching the ball as measured from the arm
socket? (b) What is the torque applied if the
catcher stops the rotation of his arm 0.3 s after
catching the ball?
In 2015, in Warsaw, Poland, Olivia Oliver of Nova
Scotia broke the world record for being the
fastest spinner on ice skates. She achieved a
record 342 rev/min, beating the existing
68. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. Guinness World Record by 34 rotations. If an ice
skater extends her arms at that rotation rate,
what would be her new rotation rate? Assume
she can be approximated by a 45-kg rod that is
1.7 m tall with a radius of 15 cm in the record
spin. With her arms stretched take the
approximation of a rod of length 130 cm with
of her body mass aligned perpendicular to
the spin axis. Neglect frictional forces.
A satellite in a geosynchronous circular orbit is
42,164.0 km from the center of Earth. A small
asteroid collides with the satellite sending it into
an elliptical orbit of apogee 45,000.0 km. What
is the speed of the satellite at apogee? Assume
its angular momentum is conserved.
A gymnast does cartwheels along the floor and
then launches herself into the air and executes
several flips in a tuck while she is airborne. If her
moment of inertia when executing the
cartwheels is and her spin rate is
0.5 rev/s, how many revolutions does she do in
the air if her moment of inertia in the tuck is
and she has 2.0 s to do the flips in
the air?
The centrifuge at NASA Ames Research Center
has a radius of 8.8 m and can produce forces on
its payload of 20 gs or 20 times the force of
gravity on Earth. (a) What is the angular
momentum of a 20-kg payload that experiences
10 gs in the centrifuge? (b) If the driver motor
was turned off in (a) and the payload lost 10 kg,
what would be its new spin rate, taking into
account there are no frictional forces present?
A ride at a carnival has four spokes to which
pods are attached that can hold two people. The
spokes are each 15 m long and are attached to a
central axis. Each spoke has mass 200.0 kg, and
the pods each have mass 100.0 kg. If the ride
spins at 0.2 rev/s with each pod containing two
50.0-kg children, what is the new spin rate if all
the children jump off the ride?
An ice skater is preparing for a jump with turns
and has his arms extended. His moment of
inertia is while his arms are
extended, and he is spinning at 0.5 rev/s. If he
launches himself into the air at 9.0 m/s at an
angle of with respect to the ice, how many
revolutions can he execute while airborne if his
moment of inertia in the air is ?
A space station consists of a giant rotating
11 • Chapter Review 547
hollow cylinder of mass including people
on the station and a radius of 100.00 m. It is
rotating in space at 3.30 rev/min in order to
produce artificial gravity. If 100 people of an
average mass of 65.00 kg spacewalk to an
awaiting spaceship, what is the new rotation rate
when all the people are off the station?
74. Neptune has a mass of and is
from the Sun with an orbital period
of 165 years. Planetesimals in the outer
primordial solar system 4.5 billion years ago
coalesced into Neptune over hundreds of
millions of years. If the primordial disk that
evolved into our present day solar system had a
radius of km and if the matter that made up
these planetesimals that later became Neptune
was spread out evenly on the edges of it, what
was the orbital period of the outer edges of the
primordial disk?
11.4 Precession of a Gyroscope
75. A gyroscope has a 0.5-kg disk that spins at 40
rev/s. The center of mass of the disk is 15 cm
from a pivot with a radius of the disk of 10 cm.
What is the precession angular velocity?
The precession angular velocity of a gyroscope is
1.0 rad/s. If the mass of the rotating disk is 0.4
kg and its radius is 30 cm, and the distance from
the center of mass to the pivot is 40 cm, what is
the rotation rate in rev/s of the disk?
The axis of Earth makes a angle with a
direction perpendicular to the plane of Earth’s
orbit. As shown below, this axis precesses,
making one complete rotation in 25,780 y.
(a) Calculate the change in angular momentum
in half this time.
(b) What is the average torque producing this
change in angular momentum?
(c) If this torque were created by a pair of forces
acting at the most effective point on the equator,
what would the magnitude of each force be?
76. 77. 
548 11 • Chapter Review
Additional Problems
78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. A marble is rolling across the floor at a speed of
7.0 m/s when it starts up a plane inclined at
to the horizontal. (a) How far along the plane
does the marble travel before coming to a rest?
(b) How much time elapses while the marble
moves up the plane?
Repeat the preceding problem replacing the
marble with a hollow sphere. Explain the new
results.
The mass of a hoop of radius 1.0 m is 6.0 kg. It
rolls across a horizontal surface with a speed of
10.0 m/s. (a) How much work is required to stop
the hoop? (b) If the hoop starts up a surface at
to the horizontal with a speed of 10.0 m/s,
how far along the incline will it travel before
stopping and rolling back down?
Repeat the preceding problem for a hollow
sphere of the same radius and mass and initial
speed. Explain the differences in the results.
A particle has mass 0.5 kg and is traveling along
the line at 2.0 m/s in the positive
y-direction. What is the particle’s angular
momentum about the origin?
A 4.0-kg particle moves in a circle of radius 2.0
m. The angular momentum of the particle varies
in time according to (a) What is the
torque on the particle about the center of the
circle at ? (b) What is the angular
velocity of the particle at ?
A proton is accelerated in a cyclotron to
85. 86. 87. 88. 89. in 0.01 s. The proton follows a
circular path. If the radius of the cyclotron is 0.5
km, (a) What is the angular momentum of the
proton about the center at its maximum speed?
(b) What is the torque on the proton about the
center as it accelerates to maximum speed?
(a) What is the angular momentum of the Moon
in its orbit around Earth? (b) How does this
angular momentum compare with the angular
momentum of the Moon on its axis? Remember
that the Moon keeps one side toward Earth at all
times.
A DVD is rotating at 500 rpm. What is the
angular momentum of the DVD if has a radius of
6.0 cm and mass 20.0 g?
A potter’s disk spins from rest up to 10 rev/s in
15 s. The disk has a mass 3.0 kg and radius 30.0
cm. What is the angular momentum of the disk
at ?
Suppose you start an antique car by exerting a
force of 300 N on its crank for 0.250 s. What is
the angular momentum given to the engine if the
handle of the crank is 0.300 m from the pivot
and the force is exerted to create maximum
torque the entire time?
A solid cylinder of mass 2.0 kg and radius 20 cm
is rotating counterclockwise around a vertical
axis through its center at 600 rev/min. A second
solid cylinder of the same mass and radius is
rotating clockwise around the same vertical axis
Access for free at openstax.org
90. 91. at 900 rev/min. If the cylinders couple so that
they rotate about the same vertical axis, what is
the angular velocity of the combination?
A boy stands at the center of a platform that is
rotating without friction at 1.0 rev/s. The boy
holds weights as far from his body as possible.
At this position the total moment of inertia of the
boy, platform, and weights is The
boy draws the weights in close to his body,
thereby decreasing the total moment of inertia
to (a) What is the final angular
velocity of the platform? (b) By how much does
the rotational kinetic energy increase?
Eight children, each of mass 40 kg, climb on a
small merry-go-round. They position themselves
evenly on the outer edge and join hands. The
merry-go-round has a radius of 4.0 m and a
moment of inertia . After the
merry-go-round is given an angular velocity of
6.0 rev/min, the children walk inward and stop
when they are 0.75 m from the axis of rotation.
What is the new angular velocity of the merry-
go-round? Assume there is negligible frictional
Challenge Problems
95. The truck shown below is initially at rest with solid
cylindrical roll of paper sitting on its bed. If the truck
moves forward with a uniform acceleration a, what
distance s does it move before the paper rolls off its
back end? (Hint : If the roll accelerates forward with
, then is accelerates backward relative to the truck
with an acceleration . Also, .)
96. 97. A bowling ball of radius 8.5 cm is tossed onto a
bowling lane with speed 9.0 m/s. The direction
of the toss is to the left, as viewed by the
observer, so the bowling ball starts to rotate
counterclockwise when in contact with the floor.
The coefficient of kinetic friction on the lane is
0.3. (a) What is the time required for the ball to
come to the point where it is not slipping? What
is the distance d to the point where the ball is
rolling without slipping?
A small ball of mass 0.50 kg is attached by a
massless string to a vertical rod that is spinning
92. 93. 94. 98. 11 • Chapter Review 549
torque on the structure.
A thin meter stick of mass 150 g rotates around
an axis perpendicular to the stick’s long axis at
an angular velocity of 240 rev/min. What is the
angular momentum of the stick if the rotation
axis (a) passes through the center of the stick?
(b) Passes through one end of the stick?
A satellite in the shape of a sphere of mass
20,000 kg and radius 5.0 m is spinning about an
axis through its center of mass. It has a rotation
rate of 8.0 rev/s. Two antennas deploy in the
plane of rotation extending from the center of
mass of the satellite. Each antenna can be
approximated as a rod has mass 200.0 kg and
length 7.0 m. What is the new rotation rate of
the satellite?
A top has moment of inertia
and radius 4.0 cm from the center of mass to the
pivot point. If it spins at 20.0 rev/s and is
precessing, how many revolutions does it
precess in 10.0 s?
as shown below. When the rod has an angular
velocity of 6.0 rad/s, the string makes an angle
of with respect to the vertical. (a) If the
angular velocity is increased to 10.0 rad/s, what
is the new angle of the string? (b) Calculate the
initial and final angular momenta of the ball. (c)
Can the rod spin fast enough so that the ball is
horizontal?
A bug flying horizontally at 1.0 m/s collides and
sticks to the end of a uniform stick hanging
vertically. After the impact, the stick swings out
550 11 • Chapter Review
to a maximum angle of from the vertical
before rotating back. If the mass of the stick is
10 times that of the bug, calculate the length of
the stick.
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 12
Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.1 Two stilt walkers in standing position. All forces acting on each stilt walker balance out; neither changes its translational
motion. In addition, all torques acting on each person balance out, and thus neither of them changes its rotational motion. The result is
static equilibrium. (credit: modification of work by Stuart Redler)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus
12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
INTRODUCTION
In earlier chapters, you learned about forces and Newton’s laws for translational motion. You then
studied torques and the rotational motion of a body about a fixed axis of rotation. You also learned that static
equilibrium means no motion at all and that dynamic equilibrium means motion without acceleration.
In this chapter, we combine the conditions for static translational equilibrium and static rotational equilibrium to
describe situations typical for any kind of construction. What type of cable will support a suspension bridge? What
type of foundation will support an office building? Will this prosthetic arm function correctly? These are examples of
questions that contemporary engineers must be able to answer.
The elastic properties of materials are especially important in engineering applications, including bioengineering.
For example, materials that can stretch or compress and then return to their original form or position make good
shock absorbers. In this chapter, you will learn about some applications that combine equilibrium with elasticity to
construct real structures that last.
552 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the physical conditions of static equilibrium.
• Draw a free-body diagram for a rigid body acted on by forces.
• Explain how the conditions for equilibrium allow us to solve statics problems.
We say that a rigid body is in equilibrium when both its linear and angular acceleration are zero relative to an inertial
frame of reference. This means that a body in equilibrium can be moving, but if so, its linear and angular velocities
must be constant. We say that a rigid body is in static equilibrium when it is at rest in our select ed frame of
ref erence. Notice that the distinction between the state of rest and a state of uniform motion is artificial—that is, an
object may be at rest in our selected frame of reference, yet to an observer moving at constant velocity relative to
our frame, the same object appears to be in uniform motion with constant velocity. Because the motion is relative,
what is in static equilibrium to us is in dynamic equilibrium to the moving observer, and vice versa. Since the laws of
physics are identical for all inertial reference frames, in an inertial frame of reference, there is no distinction
between static equilibrium and equilibrium.
According to Newton’s second law of motion, the linear acceleration of a rigid body is caused by a net force acting on
it, or
12.1
Here, the sum is of all external forces acting on the body, where m is its mass and is the linear acceleration of
its center of mass (a concept we discussed in Linear Momentum and Collisions on linear momentum and collisions).
In equilibrium, the linear acceleration is zero. If we set the acceleration to zero in Equation 12.1, we obtain the
following equation:
FIRST EQUILIBRIUM CONDITION
The first equilibrium condition for the static equilibrium of a rigid body expresses translationalequilibrium:
12.2
The first equilibrium condition, Equation 12.2, is the equilibrium condition for forces, which we encountered when
studying applications of Newton’s laws.
This vector equation is equivalent to the following three scalar equations for the components of the net force:
12.3
Analogously to Equation 12.1, we can state that the rotational acceleration rotation is caused by the net torque acting on the body, or
of a rigid body about a fixed axis of
12.4
Here is the rotational inertia of the body in rotation about this axis and the summation is over al ltorques of
external forces in Equation 12.2. In equilibrium, the rotational acceleration is zero. By setting to zero the right-hand
side of Equation 12.4, we obtain the second equilibrium condition:
SECOND EQUILIBRIUM CONDITION
The second equilibrium condition for the static equilibrium of a rigid body expresses rotationalequilibrium:
Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 553
12.5
The second equilibrium condition, Equation 12.5, is the equilibrium condition for torques that we encountered when
we studied rotational dynamics. It is worth noting that this equation for equilibrium is generally valid for rotational
equilibrium about any axis of rotation (fixed or otherwise). Again, this vector equation is equivalent to three scalar
equations for the vector components of the net torque:
12.6
The second equilibrium condition means that in equilibrium, there is no net external torque to cause rotation about
any axis.
The first and second equilibrium conditions are stated in a particular reference frame. The first condition involves
only forces and is therefore independent of the origin of the reference frame. However, the second condition
involves torque, which is defined as a cross product, where the position vector with respect to
the axis of rotation of the point where the force is applied enters the equation. Therefore, torque depends on the
location of the axis in the reference frame. However, when rotational and translational equilibrium conditions hold
simultaneously in one frame of reference, then they also hold in any other inertial frame of reference, so that the net
torque about any axis of rotation is still zero. The explanation for this is fairly straightforward.
Suppose vector is the position of the origin of a new inertial frame of reference reference S . From our study of relative motion, we know that in the new frame of reference of the point where the force is applied is related to via the equation
in the old inertial frame of
the position vector
Now, we can sum all torques of all external forces in a new reference frame,
In the final step in this chain of reasoning, we used the fact that in equilibrium in the old frame of reference, S , the
first term vanishes because of Equation 12.5 and the second term vanishes because of Equation 12.2. Hence, we
see that the net torque in any inertial frame of reference is zero, provided that both conditions for equilibrium
hold in an inertial frame of reference S .
The practical implication of this is that when applying equilibrium conditions for a rigid body, we are free to choose
any point as the origin of the reference frame. Our choice of reference frame is dictated by the physical specifics of
the problem we are solving. In one frame of reference, the mathematical form of the equilibrium conditions may be
quite complicated, whereas in another frame, the same conditions may have a simpler mathematical form that is
easy to solve. The origin of a selected frame of reference is called the pivot point.
In the most general case, equilibrium conditions are expressed by the six scalar equations (Equation 12.3 and
Equation 12.6). For planar equilibrium problems with rotation about a fixed axis, which we consider in this chapter,
we can reduce the number of equations to three. The standard procedure is to adopt a frame of reference where the
z-axis is the axis of rotation. With this choice of axis, the net torque has only a z-component, all forces that have
non-zero torques lie in the xy-plane, and therefore contributions to the net torque come from only the x- and
y-components of external forces. Thus, for planar problems with the axis of rotation perpendicular to the xy-plane,
we have the following three equilibrium conditions for forces and torques:
12.7
12.8
12.9
where the summation is over all Nexternal forces acting on the body and over their torques. In Equation 12.9, we
554 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
simplified the notation by dropping the subscript z, but we understand here that the summation is over all
contributions along the z-axis, which is the axis of rotation. In Equation 12.9, the z-component of torque force is
from the
12.10
where is the length of the lever arm of the force and is the magnitude of the force (as you saw in Fixed-Axis
Rotation). The angle is the angle between vectors and measuring from vect or t o vect or in the
count erclockwise direction (Figure 12.2). When using Equation 12.10, we often compute the magnitude of torque
and assign its sense as either positive or negative depending on the direction of rotation caused by this
torque alone. In Equation 12.9, net torque is the sum of terms, with each term computed from Equation 12.10, and
each term must have the correct sense. Similarly, in Equation 12.7, we assign the sign to force components in the
x-direction and the sign to components in the x-direction. The same rule must be consistently followed in
Equation 12.8, when computing force components along the y-axis.
FIGURE 12.2 Torque of a force: (a) When the torque of a force causes counterclockwise rotation about the axis of rotation, we say that its
sense is positive, which means the torque vector is parallel to the axis of rotation. (b) When torque of a force causes clockwise rotation
about the axis, we say that its sense is negative, which means the torque vector is antiparallel to the axis of rotation.
INTERACTIVE
View this demonstration (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21rigsquare) to see two forces act on a rigid square in two
dimensions. At all times, the static equilibrium conditions given by Equation 12.7 through Equation 12.9 are
satisfied. You can vary magnitudes of the forces and their lever arms and observe the effect these changes have on
the square.
In many equilibrium situations, one of the forces acting on the body is its weight. In free-body diagrams, the weight
vector is attached to the center of gravity of the body. For all practical purposes, the center of gravity is identical to
the center of mass, as you learned in Linear Momentum and Collisions on linear momentum and collisions. Only in
situations where a body has a large spatial extension so that the gravitational field is nonuniform throughout its
volume, are the center of gravity and the center of mass located at different points. In practical situations, however,
even objects as large as buildings or cruise ships are located in a uniform gravitational field on Earth’s surface,
where the acceleration due to gravity has a constant magnitude of In these situations, the center of
gravity is identical to the center of mass. Therefore, throughout this chapter, we use the center of mass (CM) as the
point where the weight vector is attached. Recall that the CM has a special physical meaning: When an external
force is applied to a body at exactly its CM, the body as a whole undergoes translational motion and such a force
does not cause rotation.
When the CM is located off the axis of rotation, a net gravitational torque occurs on an object. Gravitational torque
is the torque caused by weight. This gravitational torque may rotate the object if there is no support present to
Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 555
balance it. The magnitude of the gravitational torque depends on how far away from the pivot the CM is located. For
example, in the case of a tipping truck (Figure 12.3), the pivot is located on the line where the tires make contact
with the road’s surface. If the CM is located high above the road’s surface, the gravitational torque may be large
enough to turn the truck over. Passenger cars with a low-lying CM, close to the pavement, are more resistant to
tipping over than are trucks.
FIGURE 12.3 The distribution of mass affects the position of the center of mass (CM), where the weight vector is attached. If the center
of gravity is within the area of support, the truck returns to its initial position after tipping [see the left panel in (b)]. But if the center of
gravity lies outside the area of support, the truck turns over [see the right panel in (b)]. Both vehicles in (b) are out of equilibrium. Notice
that the car in (a) is in equilibrium: The low location of its center of gravity makes it hard to tip over.
INTERACTIVE
If you tilt a box so that one edge remains in contact with the table beneath it, then one edge of the base of support
becomes a pivot. As long as the center of gravity of the box remains over the base of support, gravitational torque
rotates the box back toward its original position of stable equilibrium. When the center of gravity moves outside of
the base of support, gravitational torque rotates the box in the opposite direction, and the box rolls over. View this
demonstration (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21unstable) to experiment with stable and unstable positions of a box.
EXAMPLE 12.1
Center of Gravity of a Car
A passenger car with a 2.5-m wheelbase has 52% of its weight on the front wheels on level ground, as illustrated in
Figure 12.4. Where is the CM of this car located with respect to the rear axle?
556 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.4 The weight distribution between the axles of a car. Where is the center of gravity located? (credit "car": modification of work
by Jane Whitney)
Strategy
We do not know the weight w of the car. All we know is that when the car rests on a level surface, 0.52w pushes
down on the surface at contact points of the front wheels and 0.48w pushes down on the surface at contact points
of the rear wheels. Also, the contact points are separated from each other by the distance At these
contact points, the car experiences normal reaction forces with magnitudes and on the
front and rear axles, respectively. We also know that the car is an example of a rigid body in equilibrium whose
entire weight w acts at its CM. The CM is located somewhere between the points where the normal reaction forces
act, somewhere at a distance x from the point where acts. Our task is to find x. Thus, we identify three forces
acting on the body (the car), and we can draw a free-body diagram for the extended rigid body, as shown in Figure
12.5.
FIGURE 12.5 The free-body diagram for the car clearly indicates force vectors acting on the car and distances to the center of mass (CM).
When CM is selected as the pivot point, these distances are lever arms of normal reaction forces. Notice that vector magnitudes and lever
arms do not need to be drawn to scale, but all quantities of relevance must be clearly labeled.
We are almost ready to write down equilibrium conditions Equation 12.7 through Equation 12.9 for the car, but first
we must decide on the reference frame. Suppose we choose the x-axis along the length of the car, the y-axis
vertical, and the z-axis perpendicular to this xy-plane. With this choice we only need to write Equation 12.7 and
Equation 12.9 because all the y-components are identically zero. Now we need to decide on the location of the pivot
point. We can choose any point as the location of the axis of rotation (z-axis). Suppose we place the axis of rotation
at CM, as indicated in the free-body diagram for the car. At this point, we are ready to write the equilibrium
conditions for the car.
Solution
Each equilibrium condition contains only three terms because there are equilibrium condition, Equation 12.7, reads
forces acting on the car. The first
12.11
This condition is trivially satisfied because when we substitute the data, Equation 12.11 becomes
The second equilibrium condition, Equation 12.9, reads
12.12
Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 557
where is the torque of force is the gravitational torque of force w, and is the torque of force When
the pivot is located at CM, the gravitational torque is identically zero because the lever arm of the weight with
respect to an axis that passes through CM is zero. The lines of action of both normal reaction forces are
perpendicular to their lever arms, so in Equation 12.10, we have for both forces. From the free-body
diagram, we read that torque causes clockwise rotation about the pivot at CM, so its sense is negative; and
torque causes counterclockwise rotation about the pivot at CM, so its sense is positive. With this information, we
write the second equilibrium condition as
12.13
With the help of the free-body diagram, we identify the force magnitudes and and their
corresponding lever arms and We can now write the second equilibrium condition, Equation
12.13, explicitly in terms of the unknown distance x:
12.14
Here the weight w cancels and we can solve the equation for the unknown position x of the CM. The answer is
Solution
Choosing the pivot at the position of the front axle does not change the result. The free-body diagram for this pivot
location is presented in Figure 12.6. For this choice of pivot point, the second equilibrium condition is
12.15
When we substitute the quantities indicated in the diagram, we obtain
12.16
The answer obtained by solving Equation 12.13 is, again,
FIGURE 12.6 The equivalent free-body diagram for the car; the pivot is clearly indicated.
Significance
This example shows that when solving static equilibrium problems, we are free to choose the pivot location. For
different choices of the pivot point we have different sets of equilibrium conditions to solve. However, all choices
lead to the same solution to the problem.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.1
Solve Example 12.1 by choosing the pivot at the location of the rear axle.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.2
Explain which one of the following situations satisfies both equilibrium conditions: (a) a tennis ball that does not
spin as it travels in the air; (b) a pelican that is gliding in the air at a constant velocity at one altitude; or (c) a
crankshaft in the engine of a parked car.
558 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
A special case of static equilibrium occurs when all external forces on an object act at or along the axis of rotation or
when the spatial extension of the object can be disregarded. In such a case, the object can be effectively treated like
a point mass. In this special case, we need not worry about the second equilibrium condition, Equation 12.9,
because all torques are identically zero and the first equilibrium condition (for forces) is the only condition to be
satisfied. The free-body diagram and problem-solving strategy for this special case were outlined in Newton’s Laws
of Motion and Applications of Newton’s Laws. You will see a typical equilibrium situation involving only the first
equilibrium condition in the next example.
INTERACTIVE
View this demonstration (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21pulleyknot) to see three weights that are connected by strings
over pulleys and tied together in a knot. You can experiment with the weights to see how they affect the equilibrium
position of the knot and, at the same time, see the vector-diagram representation of the first equilibrium condition
at work.
EXAMPLE 12.2
A Breaking Tension
A small pan of mass 42.0 g is supported by two strings, as shown in Figure 12.7. The maximum tension that the
string can support is 2.80 N. Mass is added gradually to the pan until one of the strings snaps. Which string is it?
How much mass must be added for this to occur?
FIGURE 12.7 Mass is added gradually to the pan until one of the strings snaps.
Strategy
This mechanical system consisting of strings, masses, and the pan is in static equilibrium. Specifically, the knot that
ties the strings to the pan is in static equilibrium. The knot can be treated as a point; therefore, we need only the first
equilibrium condition. The three forces pulling at the knot are the tension in the 5.0-cm string, the tension in
the 10.0-cm string, and the weight of the pan holding the masses. We adopt a rectangular coordinate system with
the y-axis pointing opposite to the direction of gravity and draw the free-body diagram for the knot (see Figure
12.8). To find the tension components, we must identify the direction angles and that the strings make with
the horizontal direction that is the x-axis. As you can see in Figure 12.7, the strings make two sides of a right
triangle. We can use the Pythagorean theorem to solve this triangle, shown in Figure 12.8, and find the sine and
cosine of the angles and Then we can resolve the tensions into their rectangular components, substitute in
the first condition for equilibrium (Equation 12.7 and Equation 12.8), and solve for the tensions in the strings. The
string with a greater tension will break first.
Access for free at openstax.org
12.1 • Conditions for Static Equilibrium 559
FIGURE 12.8 Free-body diagram for the knot in Example 12.2.
Solution
The weight w pulling on the knot is due to the mass Mof the pan and mass m added to the pan, or
With the help of the free-body diagram in Figure 12.8, we can set up the equilibrium conditions for the knot:
From the free-body diagram, the magnitudes of components in these equations are
We substitute these components into the equilibrium conditions and simplify. We then obtain two equilibrium
equations for the tensions:
The equilibrium equation for the x-direction tells us that the tension in the 5.0-cm string is twice the tension
in the 10.0-cm string. Therefore, the shorter string will snap. When we use the first equation to eliminate from
the second equation, we obtain the relation between the mass on the pan and the tension in the shorter string:
The string breaks when the tension reaches the critical value of for the critical mass m that breaks the string:
The preceding equation can be solved
560 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
Significance
Suppose that the mechanical system considered in this example is attached to a ceiling inside an elevator going up.
As long as the elevator moves up at a constant speed, the result stays the same because the weight does not
change. If the elevator moves up with acceleration, the critical mass is smaller because the weight of
becomes larger by an apparent weight due to the acceleration of the elevator. Still, in all cases the shorter string
breaks first.
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and analyze static equilibrium situations
• Set up a free-body diagram for an extended object in static equilibrium
• Set up and solve static equilibrium conditions for objects in equilibrium in various physical situations
All examples in this chapter are planar problems. Accordingly, we use equilibrium conditions in the component form
of Equation 12.7 to Equation 12.9. We introduced a problem-solving strategy in Example 12.1 to illustrate the
physical meaning of the equilibrium conditions. Now we generalize this strategy in a list of steps to follow when
solving static equilibrium problems for extended rigid bodies. We proceed in five practical steps.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Static Equilibrium
1. Identify the object to be analyzed. For some systems in equilibrium, it may be necessary to consider more
than one object. Identify all forces acting on the object. Identify the questions you need to answer. Identify
the information given in the problem. In realistic problems, some key information may be implicit in the
situation rather than provided explicitly.
2. Set up a free-body diagram for the object. (a) Choose the xy-reference frame for the problem. Draw a free-
body diagram for the object, including only the forces that act on it. When suitable, represent the forces in
terms of their components in the chosen reference frame. As you do this for each force, cross out the original
force so that you do not erroneously include the same force twice in equations. Label all forces—you will need
this for correct computations of net forces in the x- and y-directions. For an unknown force, the direction must
be assigned arbitrarily; think of it as a ‘working direction’ or ‘suspected direction.’ The correct direction is
determined by the sign that you obtain in the final solution. A plus sign means that the working direction is
the actual direction. A minus sign means that the actual direction is opposite to the assumed working
direction. (b) Choose the location of the rotation axis; in other words, choose the pivot point with respect to
which you will compute torques of acting forces. On the free-body diagram, indicate the location of the pivot
and the lever arms of acting forces—you will need this for correct computations of torques. In the selection of
the pivot, keep in mind that the pivot can be placed anywhere you wish, but the guiding principle is that the
best choice will simplify as much as possible the calculation of the net torque along the rotation axis.
3. Set up the equations of equilibrium for the object. (a) Use the free-body diagram to write a correct equilibrium
condition Equation 12.7 for force components in the x-direction. (b) Use the free-body diagram to write a
correct equilibrium condition Equation 12.11 for force components in the y-direction. (c) Use the free-body
diagram to write a correct equilibrium condition Equation 12.9 for torques along the axis of rotation. Use
Equation 12.10 to evaluate torque magnitudes and senses.
4. Simplify and solve the system of equations for equilibrium to obtain unknown quantities. At this point, your
work involves algebra only. Keep in mind that the number of equations must be the same as the number of
unknowns. If the number of unknowns is larger than the number of equations, the problem cannot be solved.
5. Evaluate the expressions for the unknown quantities that you obtained in your solution. Your final answers
Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 561
should have correct numerical values and correct physical units. If they do not, then use the previous steps to
track back a mistake to its origin and correct it. Also, you may independently check for your numerical answers
by shifting the pivot to a different location and solving the problem again, which is what we did in Example
12.1.
Note that setting up a free-body diagram for a rigid-body equilibrium problem is the most important component in
the solution process. Without the correct setup and a correct diagram, you will not be able to write down correct
conditions for equilibrium. Also note that a free-body diagram for an extended rigid body that may undergo
rotational motion is different from a free-body diagram for a body that experiences only translational motion (as you
saw in the chapters on Newton’s laws of motion). In translational dynamics, a body is represented as its CM, where
all forces on the body are attached and no torques appear. This does not hold true in rotational dynamics, where an
extended rigid body cannot be represented by one point alone. The reason for this is that in analyzing rotation, we
must identify torques acting on the body, and torque depends both on the acting force and on its lever arm. Here,
the free-body diagram for an extended rigid body helps us identify external torques.
EXAMPLE 12.3
The Torque Balance
Three masses are attached to a uniform meter stick, as shown in Figure 12.9. The mass of the meter stick is 150.0 g
and the masses to the left of the fulcrum are and Find the mass that balances the
system when it is attached at the right end of the stick, and the normal reaction force at the fulcrum when the
system is balanced.
is the weight of unknown mass
FIGURE 12.9 In a torque balance, a horizontal beam is supported at a fulcrum (indicated by S ) and masses are attached to both sides of the
fulcrum. The system is in static equilibrium when the beam does not rotate. It is balanced when the beam remains level.
Strategy
For the arrangement shown in the figure, we identify the following five forces acting on the meter stick:
is the weight of mass is the weight of mass
is the weight of the entire meter stick; is the normal reaction force at the support point S .
We choose a frame of reference where the direction of the y-axis is the direction of gravity, the direction of the x-axis
is along the meter stick, and the axis of rotation (the z-axis) is perpendicular to the x-axis and passes through the
support point S . In other words, we choose the pivot at the point where the meter stick touches the support. This is
a natural choice for the pivot because this point does not move as the stick rotates. Now we are ready to set up the
free-body diagram for the meter stick. We indicate the pivot and attach five vectors representing the five forces
along the line representing the meter stick, locating the forces with respect to the pivot Figure 12.10. At this stage,
we can identify the lever arms of the five forces given the information provided in the problem. For the three hanging
masses, the problem is explicit about their locations along the stick, but the information about the location of the
weight w is given implicitly. The key word here is “uniform.” We know from our previous studies that the CM of a
uniform stick is located at its midpoint, so this is where we attach the weight w, at the 50-cm mark.
562 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.10 Free-body diagram for the meter stick. The pivot is chosen at the support point S .
Solution
With Figure 12.9 and Figure 12.10 for reference, we begin by finding the lever arms of the five forces acting on the
stick:
Now we can find the five torques with respect to the chosen pivot:
The second equilibrium condition (equation for the torques) for the meter stick is
When substituting torque values into this equation, we can omit the torques giving zero contributions. In this way
the second equilibrium condition is
12.17
Selecting the -direction to be parallel to the first equilibrium condition for the stick is
Substituting the forces, the first equilibrium condition becomes
12.18
We solve these equations simultaneously for the unknown values factor and rearrange the terms to obtain
and In Equation 12.17, we cancel the g
To obtain we divide both sides by so we have
Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 563
12.19
To find the normal reaction force, we rearrange the terms in Equation 12.18, converting grams to kilograms:
12.20
Significance
Notice that Equation 12.17 is independent of the value of g. The torque balance may therefore be used to measure
mass, since variations in g-values on Earth’s surface do not affect these measurements. This is not the case for a
spring balance because it measures the force.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.3
Repeat Example 12.3 using the left end of the meter stick to calculate the torques; that is, by placing the pivot at the
left end of the meter stick.
In the next example, we show how to use the first equilibrium condition (equation for forces) in the vector form
given by Equation 12.7 and Equation 12.8. We present this solution to illustrate the importance of a suitable choice
of reference frame. Although all inertial reference frames are equivalent and numerical solutions obtained in one
frame are the same as in any other, an unsuitable choice of reference frame can make the solution quite lengthy and
convoluted, whereas a wise choice of reference frame makes the solution straightforward. We show this in the
equivalent solution to the same problem. This particular example illustrates an application of static equilibrium to
biomechanics.
EXAMPLE 12.4
Forces in the Forearm
A weightlifter is holding a 50.0-lb weight (equivalent to 222.4 N) with his forearm, as shown in Figure 12.11. His
forearm is positioned at with respect to his upper arm. The forearm is supported by a contraction of the
biceps muscle, which causes a torque around the elbow. Assuming that the tension in the biceps acts along the
vertical direction given by gravity, what tension must the muscle exert to hold the forearm at the position shown?
What is the force on the elbow joint? Assume that the forearm’s weight is negligible. Give your final answers in SI
units.
564 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.11 The forearm is rotated around the elbow (E ) by a contraction of the biceps muscle, which causes tension
Strategy
We identify three forces acting on the forearm: the unknown force at the elbow; the unknown tension in the
muscle; and the weight with magnitude We adopt the frame of reference with the x-axis along the
forearm and the pivot at the elbow. The vertical direction is the direction of the weight, which is the same as the
direction of the upper arm. The x-axis makes an angle with the vertical. The y-axis is perpendicular to the
x-axis. Now we set up the free-body diagram for the forearm. First, we draw the axes, the pivot, and the three
vectors representing the three identified forces. Then we locate the angle and represent each force by its x- and
y-components, remembering to cross out the original force vector to avoid double counting. Finally, we label the
forces and their lever arms. The free-body diagram for the forearm is shown in Figure 12.12. At this point, we are
ready to set up equilibrium conditions for the forearm. Each force has x- and y-components; therefore, we have two
equations for the first equilibrium condition, one equation for each component of the net force acting on the
forearm.
FIGURE 12.12 Free-body diagram for the forearm: The pivot is located at point E(elbow).
Notice that in our frame of reference, contributions to the second equilibrium condition (for torques) come only from
the y-components of the forces because the x-components of the forces are all parallel to their lever arms, so that
for any of them we have in Equation 12.10. For the y-components we have in Equation 12.10.
Also notice that the torque of the force at the elbow is zero because this force is attached at the pivot. So the
contribution to the net torque comes only from the torques of and of
Solution
We see from the free-body diagram that the x-component of the net force satisfies the equation
Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 565
12.21
and the y-component of the net force satisfies
12.22
Equation 12.21 and Equation 12.22 are two equations of the first equilibrium condition (for forces). Next, we read
from the free-body diagram that the net torque along the axis of rotation is
12.23
Equation 12.23 is the second equilibrium condition (for torques) for the forearm. The free-body diagram shows that
the lever arms are and At this point, we do not need to convert inches into SI units,
because as long as these units are consistent in Equation 12.23, they cancel out. Using the free-body diagram again,
we find the magnitudes of the component forces:
We substitute these magnitudes into Equation 12.21, Equation 12.22, and Equation 12.23 to obtain, respectively,
When we simplify these equations, we see that we are left with only two independent equations for the two
unknown force magnitudes, Fand T , because Equation 12.21 for the x-component is equivalent to Equation 12.22
for the y-component. In this way, we obtain the first equilibrium condition for forces
12.24
and the second equilibrium condition for torques
12.25
The magnitude of tension in the muscle is obtained by solving Equation 12.25:
The force at the elbow is obtained by solving Equation 12.24:
The negative sign in the equation tells us that the actual force at the elbow is antiparallel to the working direction
adopted for drawing the free-body diagram. In the final answer, we convert the forces into SI units of force. The
answer is
Significance
Two important issues here are worth noting. The first concerns conversion into SI units, which can be done at the
very end of the solution as long as we keep consistency in units. The second important issue concerns the hinge
566 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
joints such as the elbow. In the initial analysis of a problem, hinge joints should always be assumed to exert a force
in an arbitrar y direction, and then you must solve for all components of a hinge force independently. In this example,
the elbow force happens to be vertical because the problem assumes the tension by the biceps to be vertical as
well. Such a simplification, however, is not a general rule.
Solution
Suppose we adopt a reference frame with the direction of the y-axis along the 50-lb weight and the pivot placed at
the elbow. In this frame, all three forces have only y-components, so we have only one equation for the first
equilibrium condition (for forces). We draw the free-body diagram for the forearm as shown in Figure 12.13,
indicating the pivot, the acting forces and their lever arms with respect to the pivot, and the angles and the forces and (respectively) make with their lever arms. In the definition of torque given by Equation 12.10,
the angle is the direction angle of the vector counted count erclockwise from the radial direction of the lever
arm that always points away from the pivot. By the same convention, the angle is measured count erclockwise
from the radial direction of the lever arm to the vector Done this way, the non-zero torques are most easily
computed by directly substituting into Equation 12.10 as follows:
that
FIGURE 12.13 Free-body diagram for the forearm for the equivalent solution. The pivot is located at point E (elbow).
The second equilibrium condition, can be now written as
12.26
From the free-body diagram, the first equilibrium condition (for forces) is
12.27
Equation 12.26 is identical to Equation 12.25 and gives the result Equation 12.27 gives
We see that these answers are identical to our previous answers, but the second choice for the frame of reference
leads to an equivalent solution that is simpler and quicker because it does not require that the forces be resolved
into their rectangular components.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.4
Repeat Example 12.4 assuming that the forearm is an object of uniform density that weighs 8.896 N.
Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 567
EXAMPLE 12.5
A Ladder Resting Against a Wall
A uniform ladder is long and weighs 400.0 N. The ladder rests against a slippery vertical wall, as shown
in Figure 12.14. The minimum inclination angle between the ladder and the rough floor below which the ladder slips
is Find the reaction forces from the floor and from the wall on the ladder and the coefficient of static
friction at the interface of the ladder with the floor that prevents the ladder from slipping.
FIGURE 12.14 A 5.0-m-long ladder rests against a frictionless wall.
Strategy
We can identify four forces acting on the ladder. The first force is the normal reaction force Nfrom the floor in the
upward vertical direction. The second force is the static friction force directed horizontally along the floor
toward the wall—this force prevents the ladder from slipping. These two forces act on the ladder at its contact point
with the floor. The third force is the weight w of the ladder, attached at its CM located midway between its ends. The
fourth force is the normal reaction force Ffrom the wall in the horizontal direction away from the wall, attached at
the contact point with the wall. There are no other forces because the wall is slippery, which means there is no
friction between the wall and the ladder. Based on this analysis, we adopt the frame of reference with the y-axis in
the vertical direction (parallel to the wall) and the x-axis in the horizontal direction (parallel to the floor). In this
frame, each force has either a horizontal component or a vertical component but not both, which simplifies the
solution. We select the pivot at the contact point with the floor. In the free-body diagram for the ladder, we indicate
the pivot, all four forces and their lever arms, and the angles between lever arms and the forces, as shown in Figure
12.15. With our choice of the pivot location, there is no torque either from the normal reaction force Nor from the
static friction fbecause they both act at the pivot.
568 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.15 Free-body diagram for a ladder resting against a frictionless wall.
Solution
From the free-body diagram, the net force in the x-direction is
12.28
the net force in the y-direction is
12.29
and the net torque along the rotation axis at the pivot point is
12.30
where is the torque of the weight w and is the torque of the reaction F . From the free-body diagram, we
identify that the lever arm of the reaction at the wall is and the lever arm of the weight is
With the help of the free-body diagram, we identify the angles to be used in Equation 12.10 for
torques: for the torque from the reaction force with the wall, and for the
torque due to the weight. Now we are ready to use Equation 12.10 to compute torques:
We substitute the torques into Equation 12.30 and solve for
12.31
We obtain the normal reaction force with the floor by solving Equation 12.29: The magnitude of
friction is obtained by solving Equation 12.28: Since the ladder will slip if the angle is any
smaller, the static friction force is at its maximum angle and the coefficient of static friction is
The net force on the ladder at the contact point with the floor is the vector sum of the normal reaction from the floor
and the static friction forces:
Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 569
Its magnitude is
and its direction is
We should emphasize here two general observations of practical use. First, notice that when we choose a pivot
point, there is no expectation that the system will actually pivot around the chosen point. The ladder in this example
is not rotating at all but firmly stands on the floor; nonetheless, its contact point with the floor is a good choice for
the pivot. Second, notice when we use Equation 12.10 for the computation of individual torques, we do not need to
resolve the forces into their normal and parallel components with respect to the direction of the lever arm, and we
do not need to consider a sense of the torque. As long as the angle in Equation 12.10 is correctly identified—with the
help of a free-body diagram—as the angle measured counterclockwise from the direction of the lever arm to the
direction of the force vector, Equation 12.10 gives both the magnitude and the sense of the torque. This is because
torque is the vector product of the lever-arm vector crossed with the force vector, and Equation 12.10 expresses the
rectangular component of this vector product along the axis of rotation.
Significance
This result is independent of the length of the ladder because Lis cancelled in the second equilibrium condition,
Equation 12.31. No matter how long or short the ladder is, as long as its weight is 400 N and the angle with the floor
is our results hold. But the ladder will slip if the net torque becomes negative in Equation 12.31. This happens
for some angles when the coefficient of static friction is not great enough to prevent the ladder from slipping.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.5
For the situation described in Example 12.5, determine the values of the coefficient ladder starts slipping, given that is the angle that the ladder makes with the floor.
of static friction for which the
EXAMPLE 12.6
Forces on Door Hinges
A swinging door that weighs is supported by hinges Aand Bso that the door can swing about a vertical
axis passing through the hinges Figure 12.16. The door has a width of and the door slab has a uniform
mass density. The hinges are placed symmetrically at the door’s edge in such a way that the door’s weight is evenly
distributed between them. The hinges are separated by distance Find the forces on the hinges when
the door rests half-open.
570 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.16 A 400-N swinging vertical door is supported by two hinges attached at points Aand B .
Strategy
The forces that the door exerts on its hinges can be found by simply reversing the directions of the forces that the
hinges exert on the door. Hence, our task is to find the forces from the hinges on the door. Three forces act on the
door slab: an unknown force from hinge an unknown force from hinge and the known weight attached
at the center of mass of the door slab. The CM is located at the geometrical center of the door because the slab has
a uniform mass density. We adopt a rectangular frame of reference with the y-axis along the direction of gravity and
the x-axis in the plane of the slab, as shown in panel (a) of Figure 12.17, and resolve all forces into their rectangular
components. In this way, we have four unknown component forces: two components of force and and
two components of force and In the free-body diagram, we represent the two forces at the hinges by
their vector components, whose assumed orientations are arbitrary. Because there are four unknowns
and we must set up four independent equations. One equation is the equilibrium condition for forces in the
x-direction. The second equation is the equilibrium condition for forces in the y-direction. The third equation is the
equilibrium condition for torques in rotation about a hinge. Because the weight is evenly distributed between the
hinges, we have the fourth equation, To set up the equilibrium conditions, we draw a free-body diagram
and choose the pivot point at the upper hinge, as shown in panel (b) of Figure 12.17. Finally, we solve the equations
for the unknown force components and find the forces.
Access for free at openstax.org
12.2 • Examples of Static Equilibrium 571
FIGURE 12.17 (a) Geometry and (b) free-body diagram for the door.
Solution
From the free-body diagram for the door we have the first equilibrium condition for forces:
We select the pivot at point P(upper hinge, per the free-body diagram) and write the second equilibrium condition
for torques in rotation about point P :
12.32
We use the free-body diagram to find all the terms in this equation:
In evaluating torques into Equation 12.32 and compute
we use the geometry of the triangle shown in part (a) of the figure. Now we substitute these
Therefore the magnitudes of the horizontal component forces are The forces on the door are
The forces on the hinges are found from Newton’s third law as
572 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
Significance
Note that if the problem were formulated without the assumption of the weight being equally distributed between
the two hinges, we wouldn’t be able to solve it because the number of the unknowns would be greater than the
number of equations expressing equilibrium conditions.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.6
Solve the problem in Example 12.6 by taking the pivot position at the center of mass.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.7
A 50-kg person stands 1.5 m away from one end of a uniform 6.0-m-long scaffold of mass 70.0 kg. Find the tensions
in the two vertical ropes supporting the scaffold.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.8
A 400.0-N sign hangs from the end of a uniform strut. The strut is 4.0 m long and weighs 600.0 N. The strut is
supported by a hinge at the wall and by a cable whose other end is tied to the wall at a point 3.0 m above the left
end of the strut. Find the tension in the supporting cable and the force of the hinge on the strut.
Access for free at openstax.org
12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 573
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concepts of stress and strain in describing elastic deformations of materials
• Describe the types of elastic deformation of objects and materials
A model of a rigid body is an idealized example of an object that does not deform under the actions of external
forces. It is very useful when analyzing mechanical systems—and many physical objects are indeed rigid to a great
extent. The extent to which an object can be perceivedas rigid depends on the physical properties of the material
from which it is made. For example, a ping-pong ball made of plastic is brittle, and a tennis ball made of rubber is
elastic when acted upon by squashing forces. However, under other circumstances, both a ping-pong ball and a
tennis ball may bounce well as rigid bodies. Similarly, someone who designs prosthetic limbs may be able to
approximate the mechanics of human limbs by modeling them as rigid bodies; however, the actual combination of
bones and tissues is an elastic medium.
For the remainder of this chapter, we move from consideration of forces that affect the motion of an object to those
that affect an object’s shape. A change in shape due to the application of a force is known as a deformation. Even
very small forces are known to cause some deformation. Deformation is experienced by objects or physical media
under the action of external forces—for example, this may be squashing, squeezing, ripping, twisting, shearing, or
pulling the objects apart. In the language of physics, two terms describe the forces on objects undergoing
deformation: stress and strain.
Stress is a quantity that describes the magnitude of forces that cause deformation. Stress is generally defined as
f orce per unit area. When forces pull on an object and cause its elongation, like the stretching of an elastic band, we
call such stress a tensile stress. When forces cause a compression of an object, we call it a compressive stress.
When an object is being squeezed from all sides, like a submarine in the depths of an ocean, we call this kind of
stress a bulk stress (or volume stress). In other situations, the acting forces may be neither tensile nor
compressive, and still produce a noticeable deformation. For example, suppose you hold a book tightly between the
palms of your hands, then with one hand you press-and-pull on the front cover away from you, while with the other
hand you press-and-pull on the back cover toward you. In such a case, when deforming forces act tangentially to the
object’s surface, we call them ‘shear’ forces and the stress they cause is called shear stress.
The SI unit of stress is the pascal (Pa). When one newton of force presses on a unit surface area of one meter
squared, the resulting stress is one pascal:
In the Imperial system of units, the unit of stress is ‘psi,’ which stands for ‘pound per square inch’ unit that is often used for bulk stress is the atm (atmosphere). Conversion factors are
Another
An object or medium under stress becomes deformed. The quantity that describes this deformation is called strain.
Strain is given as a fractional change in either length (under tensile stress) or volume (under bulk stress) or
geometry (under shear stress). Therefore, strain is a dimensionless number. Strain under a tensile stress is called
tensile strain, strain under bulk stress is called bulk strain (or volume strain), and that caused by shear stress is
called shear strain.
The greater the stress, the greater the strain; however, the relation between strain and stress does not need to be
linear. Only when stress is sufficiently low is the deformation it causes in direct proportion to the stress value. The
proportionality constant in this relation is called the elastic modulus. In the linear limit of low stress values, the
general relation between stress and strain is
12.33
574 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
As we can see from dimensional analysis of this relation, the elastic modulus has the same physical unit as stress
because strain is dimensionless.
We can also see from Equation 12.33 that when an object is characterized by a large value of elastic modulus, the
effect of stress is small. On the other hand, a small elastic modulus means that stress produces large strain and
noticeable deformation. For example, a stress on a rubber band produces larger strain (deformation) than the same
stress on a steel band of the same dimensions because the elastic modulus for rubber is two orders of magnitude
smaller than the elastic modulus for steel.
The elastic modulus for tensile stress is called Young’s modulus; that for the bulk stress is called the bulk modulus;
and that for shear stress is called the shear modulus. Note that the relation between stress and strain is an
observedrelation, measured in the laboratory. Elastic moduli for various materials are measured under various
physical conditions, such as varying temperature, and collected in engineering data tables for reference (Table
12.1). These tables are valuable references for industry and for anyone involved in engineering or construction. In
the next section, we discuss strain-stress relations beyond the linear limit represented by Equation 12.33, in the full
range of stress values up to a fracture point. In the remainder of this section, we study the linear limit expressed by
Equation 12.33.
Material Young’s modulus Bulk modulus Shear modulus
Aluminum 7.0 7.5 2.5
Bone (tension) 1.6 0.8 8.0
Bone (compression) 0.9
Brass 9.0 6.0 3.5
Brick 1.5
Concrete 2.0
Copper 11.0 14.0 4.4
Crown glass 6.0 5.0 2.5
Granite 4.5 4.5 2.0
Hair (human) 1.0
Hardwood 1.5 1.0
Iron 21.0 16.0 7.7
Lead 1.6 4.1 0.6
Marble 6.0 7.0 2.0
Nickel 21.0 17.0 7.8
Polystyrene 3.0
TABLE 12.1 Approximate Elastic Moduli for Selected Materials
Access for free at openstax.org
12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 575
Material Young’s modulus Bulk modulus Shear modulus
Silk 6.0
Spider thread 3.0
Steel 20.0 16.0 7.5
Acetone 0.07
Ethanol 0.09
Glycerin 0.45
Mercury 2.5
Water 0.22
TABLE 12.1 Approximate Elastic Moduli for Selected Materials
Tensile or Compressive Stress, Strain, and Young’s Modulus
Tension or compression occurs when two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude act on an object along only one of
its dimensions, in such a way that the object does not move. One way to envision such a situation is illustrated in
Figure 12.18. A rod segment is either stretched or squeezed by a pair of forces acting along its length and
perpendicular to its cross-section. The net effect of such forces is that the rod changes its length from the original
length that it had before the forces appeared, to a new length Lthat it has under the action of the forces. This
change in length may be either elongation (when Lis larger than the original length or
contraction (when Lis smaller than the original length Tensile stress and strain occur when the forces are
stretching an object, causing its elongation, and the length change is positive. Compressive stress and strain
occur when the forces are contracting an object, causing its shortening, and the length change is negative.
In either of these situations, we define stress as the ratio of the deforming force to the cross-sectional area Aof
the object being deformed. The symbol that we reserve for the deforming force means that this force acts
perpendicularly to the cross-section of the object. Forces that act parallel to the cross-section do not change the
length of an object. The definition of the tensile stress is
12.34
Tensile strain is the measure of the deformation of an object under tensile stress and is defined as the fractional
change of the object’s length when the object experiences tensile stress
12.35
Compressive stress and strain are defined by the same formulas, Equation 12.34 and Equation 12.35, respectively.
The only difference from the tensile situation is that for compressive stress and strain, we take absolute values of
the right-hand sides in Equation 12.34 and Equation 12.35.
576 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.18 When an object is in either tension or compression, the net force on it is zero, but the object deforms by changing its original
length (a) Tension: The rod is elongated by (b) Compression: The rod is contracted by In both cases, the deforming force acts
along the length of the rod and perpendicular to its cross-section. In the linear range of low stress, the cross-sectional area of the rod does
not change.
Young’s modulus Yis the elastic modulus when deformation is caused by either tensile or compressive stress, and is
defined by Equation 12.33. Dividing this equation by tensile strain, we obtain the expression for Young’s modulus:
12.36
EXAMPLE 12.7
Compressive Stress in a Pillar
A sculpture weighing 10,000 N rests on a horizontal surface at the top of a 6.0-m-tall vertical pillar Figure 12.19.
The pillar’s cross-sectional area is and it is made of granite with a mass density of Find the
compressive stress at the cross-section located 3.0 m below the top of the pillar and the value of the compressive
strain of the top 3.0-m segment of the pillar.
Access for free at openstax.org
12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 577
FIGURE 12.19 Nelson’s Column in Trafalgar Square, London, England. (credit: modification of work by Cristian Bortes)
Strategy
First we find the weight of the 3.0-m-long top section of the pillar. The normal force that acts on the cross-section
located 3.0 m down from the top is the sum of the pillar’s weight and the sculpture’s weight. Once we have the
normal force, we use Equation 12.34 to find the stress. To find the compressive strain, we find the value of Young’s
modulus for granite in Table 12.1 and invert Equation 12.36.
Solution
The volume of the pillar segment with height is
and cross-sectional area With the density of granite the mass of the pillar segment is
The weight of the pillar segment is
The weight of the sculpture is below the sculpture is
so the normal force on the cross-sectional surface located 3.0 m
Therefore, the stress is
Young’s modulus for granite is position is
Therefore, the compressive strain at this
Significance
Notice that the normal force acting on the cross-sectional area of the pillar is not constant along its length, but
varies from its smallest value at the top to its largest value at the bottom of the pillar. Thus, if the pillar has a uniform
578 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
cross-sectional area along its length, the stress is largest at its base.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.9
Find the compressive stress and strain at the base of Nelson’s column.
EXAMPLE 12.8
Stretching a Rod
A 2.0-m-long steel rod has a cross-sectional area of The rod is a part of a vertical support that holds a
heavy 550-kg platform that hangs attached to the rod’s lower end. Ignoring the weight of the rod, what is the tensile
stress in the rod and the elongation of the rod under the stress?
Strategy
First we compute the tensile stress in the rod under the weight of the platform in accordance with Equation 12.34.
Then we invert Equation 12.36 to find the rod’s elongation, using From Table 12.1, Young’s modulus
for steel is
Solution
Substituting numerical values into the equations gives us
Significance
Similarly as in the example with the column, the tensile stress in this example is not uniform along the length of the
rod. Unlike in the previous example, however, if the weight of the rod is taken into consideration, the stress in the
rod is largest at the top and smallest at the bottom of the rod where the equipment is attached.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.10
A 2.0-m-long wire stretches 1.0 mm when subjected to a load. What is the tensile strain in the wire?
Objects can often experience both compressive stress and tensile stress simultaneously Figure 12.20. One example
is a long shelf loaded with heavy books that sags between the end supports under the weight of the books. The top
surface of the shelf is in compressive stress and the bottom surface of the shelf is in tensile stress. Similarly, long
and heavy beams sag under their own weight. In modern building construction, such bending strains can be almost
eliminated with the use of I-beams Figure 12.21.
FIGURE 12.20 (a) An object bending downward experiences tensile stress (stretching) in the upper section and compressive stress
(compressing) in the lower section. (b) Elite weightlifters often bend iron bars temporarily during lifting, as in the 2012 Olympics
Access for free at openstax.org
12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 579
competition. (credit b: modification of work by Oleksandr Kocherzhenko)
FIGURE 12.21 Steel I-beams are used in construction to reduce bending strains. (credit: modification of work by “US Army Corps of
Engineers Europe District”/Flickr)
INTERACTIVE
A heavy box rests on a table supported by three columns. View this demonstration (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21movebox) to move the box to see how the compression (or tension) in the columns is affected when the box
changes its position.
Bulk Stress, Strain, and Modulus
When you dive into water, you feel a force pressing on every part of your body from all directions. What you are
experiencing then is bulk stress, or in other words, pressure. Bulk stress always tends to decrease the volume
enclosed by the surface of a submerged object. The forces of this “squeezing” are always perpendicular to the
submerged surface Figure 12.22. The effect of these forces is to decrease the volume of the submerged object by an
amount compared with the volume of the object in the absence of bulk stress. This kind of deformation is
called bulk strain and is described by a change in volume relative to the original volume:
12.37
FIGURE 12.22 An object under increasing bulk stress always undergoes a decrease in its volume. Equal forces perpendicular to the surface
act from all directions. The effect of these forces is to decrease the volume by the amount compared to the original volume,
The bulk strain results from the bulk stress, which is a force area Aof a submerged object. This kind of physical quantity, or pressure p, is defined as
normal to a surface that presses on the unit surface
12.38
We will study pressure in fluids in greater detail in Fluid Mechanics. An important characteristic of pressure is that it
580 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
is a scalar quantity and does not have any particular direction; that is, pressure acts equally in all possible
directions. When you submerge your hand in water, you sense the same amount of pressure acting on the top
surface of your hand as on the bottom surface, or on the side surface, or on the surface of the skin between your
fingers. What you are perceiving in this case is an increase in pressure over what you are used to feeling when
your hand is not submerged in water. What you feel when your hand is not submerged in the water is the normal
pressure of one atmosphere, which serves as a reference point. The bulk stress is this increase in pressure, or
over the normal level,
When the bulk stress increases, the bulk strain increases in response, in accordance with Equation 12.33. The
proportionality constant in this relation is called the bulk modulus, B , or
12.39
The minus sign that appears in Equation 12.39 is for consistency, to ensure that Bis a positive quantity. Note that
the minus sign is necessary because an increase in pressure (a positive quantity) always causes a decrease
in volume, and decrease in volume is a negative quantity. The reciprocal of the bulk modulus is called
compressibility or
12.40
The term ‘compressibility’ is used in relation to fluids (gases and liquids). Compressibility describes the change in
the volume of a fluid per unit increase in pressure. Fluids characterized by a large compressibility are relatively easy
to compress. For example, the compressibility of water is and the compressibility of acetone is
This means that under a 1.0-atm increase in pressure, the relative decrease in volume is
approximately three times as large for acetone as it is for water.
EXAMPLE 12.9
Hydraulic Press
In a hydraulic press Figure 12.23, a 250-liter volume of oil is subjected to a 2300-psi pressure increase. If the
compressibility of oil is find the bulk strain and the absolute decrease in the volume of oil when
the press is operating.
FIGURE 12.23 In a hydraulic press, when a small piston is displaced downward, the pressure in the oil is transmitted throughout the oil to
the large piston, causing the large piston to move upward. A small force applied to a small piston causes a large pressing force, which the
large piston exerts on an object that is either lifted or squeezed. The device acts as a mechanical lever.
Strategy
We must invert Equation 12.40 to find the bulk strain. First, we convert the pressure increase from psi to atm,
and identify
Access for free at openstax.org
12.3 • Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus 581
Solution
Substituting values into the equation, we have
Significance
Notice that since the compressibility of water is 2.32 times larger than that of oil, if the working substance in the
hydraulic press of this problem were changed to water, the bulk strain as well as the volume change would be 2.32
times larger.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.11
If the normal force acting on each face of a cubical resulting change in the volume of the piece of steel.
piece of steel is changed by find the
Shear Stress, Strain, and Modulus
The concepts of shear stress and strain concern only solid objects or materials. Buildings and tectonic plates are
examples of objects that may be subjected to shear stresses. In general, these concepts do not apply to fluids.
Shear deformation occurs when two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude are applied tangentially to opposite
surfaces of a solid object, causing no deformation in the transverse direction to the line of force, as in the typical
example of shear stress illustrated in Figure 12.24. Shear deformation is characterized by a gradual shift of
layers in the direction tangent to the acting forces. This gradation in occurs in the transverse direction along
some distance Shear strain is defined by the ratio of the largest displacement to the transverse distance
12.41
Shear strain is caused by shear stress. Shear stress is due to forces that act paral lelto the surface. We use the
for such forces. The magnitude per surface area Awhere shearing force is applied is the measure of
symbol shear stress
12.42
The shear modulus is the proportionality constant in Equation 12.33 and is defined by the ratio of stress to strain.
Shear modulus is commonly denoted by S :
12.43
582 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
FIGURE 12.24 An object under shear stress: Two antiparallel forces of equal magnitude are applied tangentially to opposite parallel
surfaces of the object. The dashed-line contour depicts the resulting deformation. There is no change in the direction transverse to the
acting forces and the transverse length is unaffected. Shear deformation is characterized by a gradual shift of layers in the direction
tangent to the forces.
EXAMPLE 12.10
An Old Bookshelf
A cleaning person tries to move a heavy, old bookcase on a carpeted floor by pushing tangentially on the surface of
the very top shelf. However, the only noticeable effect of this effort is similar to that seen in Figure 12.24, and it
disappears when the person stops pushing. The bookcase is 180.0 cm tall and 90.0 cm wide with four 30.0-cm-
deep shelves, all partially loaded with books. The total weight of the bookcase and books is 600.0 N. If the person
gives the top shelf a 50.0-N push that displaces the top shelf horizontally by 15.0 cm relative to the motionless
bottom shelf, find the shear modulus of the bookcase.
Strategy
The only pieces of relevant information are the physical dimensions of the bookcase, the value of the tangential
force, and the displacement this force causes. We identify and
and we use Equation 12.43 to compute the shear modulus.
Solution
Substituting numbers into the equations, we obtain for the shear modulus
We can also find shear stress and strain, respectively:
Significance
If the person in this example gave the shelf a healthy push, it might happen that the induced shear would collapse it
to a pile of rubbish. Much the same shear mechanism is responsible for failures of earth-filled dams and levees; and,
in general, for landslides.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 12.12
Explain why the concepts of Young’s modulus and shear modulus do not apply to fluids.
Access for free at openstax.org
12.4 • Elasticity and Plasticity 583
12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the limit where a deformation of material is elastic
• Describe the range where materials show plastic behavior
• Analyze elasticity and plasticity on a stress-strain diagram
We referred to the proportionality constant between stress and strain as the elastic modulus. But why do we call it
that? What does it mean for an object to be elastic and how do we describe its behavior?
Elasticity is the tendency of solid objects and materials to return to their original shape after the external forces
(load) causing a deformation are removed. An object is elastic when it comes back to its original size and shape
when the load is no longer present. Physical reasons for elastic behavior vary among materials and depend on the
microscopic structure of the material. For example, the elasticity of polymers and rubbers is caused by stretching
polymer chains under an applied force. In contrast, the elasticity of metals is caused by resizing and reshaping the
crystalline cells of the lattices (which are the material structures of metals) under the action of externally applied
forces.
The two parameters that determine the elasticity of a material are its elastic modulus and its elastic limit . A high
elastic modulus is typical for materials that are hard to deform; in other words, materials that require a high load to
achieve a significant strain. An example is a steel band. A low elastic modulus is typical for materials that are easily
deformed under a load; for example, a rubber band. If the stress under a load becomes too high, then when the load
is removed, the material no longer comes back to its original shape and size, but relaxes to a different shape and
size: The material becomes permanently deformed. The elastic limit is the stress value beyond which the material
no longer behaves elastically but becomes permanently deformed.
Our perception of an elastic material depends on both its elastic limit and its elastic modulus. For example, all
rubbers are characterized by a low elastic modulus and a high elastic limit; hence, it is easy to stretch them and the
stretch is noticeably large. Among materials with identical elastic limits, the most elastic is the one with the lowest
elastic modulus.
When the load increases from zero, the resulting stress is in direct proportion to strain in the way given by Equation
12.33, but only when stress does not exceed some limiting value. For stress values within this linear limit, we can
describe elastic behavior in analogy with Hooke’s law for a spring. According to Hooke’s law, the stretch value of a
spring under an applied force is directly proportional to the magnitude of the force. Conversely, the response force
from the spring to an applied stretch is directly proportional to the stretch. In the same way, the deformation of a
material under a load is directly proportional to the load, and, conversely, the resulting stress is directly proportional
to strain. The linearity limit (or the proportionality limit) is the largest stress value beyond which stress is no longer
proportional to strain. Beyond the linearity limit, the relation between stress and strain is no longer linear. When
stress becomes larger than the linearity limit but still within the elasticity limit, behavior is still elastic, but the
relation between stress and strain becomes nonlinear.
For stresses beyond the elastic limit, a material exhibits plastic behavior. This means the material deforms
irreversibly and does not return to its original shape and size, even when the load is removed. When stress is
gradually increased beyond the elastic limit, the material undergoes plastic deformation. Rubber-like materials
show an increase in stress with the increasing strain, which means they become more difficult to stretch and,
eventually, they reach a fracture point where they break. Ductile materials such as metals show a gradual decrease
in stress with the increasing strain, which means they become easier to deform as stress-strain values approach the
breaking point. Microscopic mechanisms responsible for plasticity of materials are different for different materials.
We can graph the relationship between stress and strain on a stress-strain diagram. Each material has its own
characteristic strain-stress curve. A typical stress-strain diagram for a ductile metal under a load is shown in Figure
12.25. In this figure, strain is a fractional elongation (not drawn to scale). When the load is gradually increased, the
linear behavior (red line) that starts at the no-load point (the origin) ends at the linearity limit at point H . For further
load increases beyond point H , the stress-strain relation is nonlinear but still elastic. In the figure, this nonlinear
region is seen between points Hand E . Ever larger loads take the stress to the elasticity limit E , where elastic
584 12 • Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
behavior ends and plastic deformation begins. Beyond the elasticity limit, when the load is removed, for example at
P , the material relaxes to a new shape and size along the green line. This is to say that the material becomes
permanently deformed and does not come back to its initial shape and size when stress becomes zero.
The material undergoes plastic deformation for loads large enough to cause stress to go beyond the elasticity limit
at E . The material continues to be plastically deformed until the stress reaches the fracture point (breaking point).
Beyond the fracture point, we no longer have one sample of material, so the diagram ends at the fracture point. For
the completeness of this qualitative description, it should be said that the linear, elastic, and plasticity limits denote
a range of values rather than one sharp point.
FIGURE 12.25 Typical stress-strain plot for a metal under a load: The graph ends at the fracture point. The arrows show the direction of
changes under an ever-increasing load. Points Hand Eare the linearity and elasticity limits, respectively. Between points Hand E , the
behavior is nonlinear. The green line originating at Pillustrates the metal’s response when the load is removed. The permanent deformation
has a strain value at the point where the green line intercepts the horizontal axis.
The value of stress at the fracture point is called breaking stress (or ultimate stress). Materials with similar elastic
properties, such as two metals, may have very different breaking stresses. For example, ultimate stress for
aluminum is and for steel it may be as high as depending on the kind of steel. We can
make a quick estimate, based on Equation 12.34, that for rods with a cross-sectional area, the breaking load
for an aluminum rod is and the breaking load for a steel rod is about nine times larger.
Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter Review
Key Terms
breaking stress (ultimate stress) value of stress at
the fracture point
bulk modulus elastic modulus for the bulk stress
bulk strain (or volume strain) strain under the bulk
stress, given as fractional change in volume
bulk stress (or volume stress) stress caused by
compressive forces, in all directions
center of gravity point where the weight vector is
attached
compressibility reciprocal of the bulk modulus
compressive strain strain that occurs when forces
are contracting an object, causing its shortening
compressive stress stress caused by compressive
forces, only in one direction
elastic object that comes back to its original size and
shape when the load is no longer present
elastic limit stress value beyond which material no
longer behaves elastically and becomes
permanently deformed
elastic modulus proportionality constant in linear
relation between stress and strain, in SI pascals
equilibrium body is in equilibrium when its linear and
angular accelerations are both zero relative to an
inertial frame of reference
first equilibrium condition expresses translational
equilibrium; all external forces acting on the body
balance out and their vector sum is zero
gravitational torque torque on the body caused by its
weight; it occurs when the center of gravity of the
body is not located on the axis of rotation
linearity limit (proportionality limit) largest stress
value beyond which stress is no longer proportional
to strain
Key Equations
First Equilibrium Condition
Second Equilibrium Condition
Linear relation between
stress and strain
Young’s modulus
Bulk modulus
Shear modulus
12 • Chapter Review 585
normal pressure pressure of one atmosphere, serves
as a reference level for pressure
pascal (Pa) SI unit of stress, SI unit of pressure
plastic behavior material deforms irreversibly, does
not go back to its original shape and size when load
is removed and stress vanishes
pressure force pressing in normal direction on a
surface per the surface area, the bulk stress in fluids
second equilibrium condition expresses rotational
equilibrium; all torques due to external forces acting
on the body balance out and their vector sum is zero
shear modulus elastic modulus for shear stress
shear strain strain caused by shear stress
shear stress stress caused by shearing forces
static equilibrium body is in static equilibrium when
it is at rest in our selected inertial frame of reference
strain dimensionless quantity that gives the amount
of deformation of an object or medium under stress
stress quantity that contains information about the
magnitude of force causing deformation, defined as
force per unit area
stress-strain diagram graph showing the relationship
between stress and strain, characteristic of a
material
tensile strain strain under tensile stress, given as
fractional change in length, which occurs when
forces are stretching an object, causing its
elongation
tensile stress stress caused by tensile forces, only in
one direction, which occurs when forces are
stretching an object, causing its elongation
Young’s modulus elastic modulus for tensile or
compressive stress
586 12 • Chapter Review
Summary
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium
• A body is in equilibrium when it remains either in
uniform motion (both translational and
rotational) or at rest. When a body in a selected
inertial frame of reference neither rotates nor
moves in translational motion, we say the body is
in static equilibrium in this frame of reference.
• Conditions for equilibrium require that the sum of
all external forces acting on the body is zero (first
condition of equilibrium), and the sum of all
external torques from external forces is zero
(second condition of equilibrium). These two
conditions must be simultaneously satisfied in
equilibrium. If one of them is not satisfied, the
body is not in equilibrium.
• The free-body diagram for a body is a useful tool
that allows us to count correctly all contributions
from all external forces and torques acting on the
body. Free-body diagrams for the equilibrium of
an extended rigid body must indicate a pivot
point and lever arms of acting forces with respect
to the pivot.
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium
• A variety of engineering problems can be solved
by applying equilibrium conditions for rigid
bodies.
• In applications, identify all forces that act on a
rigid body and note their lever arms in rotation
about a chosen rotation axis. Construct a free-
body diagram for the body. Net external forces
and torques can be clearly identified from a
correctly constructed free-body diagram. In this
way, you can set up the first equilibrium
condition for forces and the second equilibrium
condition for torques.
• In setting up equilibrium conditions, we are free
to adopt any inertial frame of reference and any
position of the pivot point. All choices lead to one
answer. However, some choices can make the
process of finding the solution unduly
complicated. We reach the same answer no
matter what choices we make. The only way to
master this skill is to practice.
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus
• External forces on an object (or medium) cause
Access for free at openstax.org
its deformation, which is a change in its size and
shape. The strength of the forces that cause
deformation is expressed by stress, which in SI
units is measured in the unit of pressure (pascal).
The extent of deformation under stress is
expressed by strain, which is dimensionless.
• For a small stress, the relation between stress
and strain is linear. The elastic modulus is the
proportionality constant in this linear relation.
• Tensile (or compressive) strain is the response of
an object or medium to tensile (or compressive)
stress. Here, the elastic modulus is called
Young’s modulus. Tensile (or compressive) stress
causes elongation (or shortening) of the object or
medium and is due to an external forces acting
along only one direction perpendicular to the
cross-section.
• Bulk strain is the response of an object or
medium to bulk stress. Here, the elastic modulus
is called the bulk modulus. Bulk stress causes a
change in the volume of the object or medium
and is caused by forces acting on the body from
all directions, perpendicular to its surface.
Compressibility of an object or medium is the
reciprocal of its bulk modulus.
• Shear strain is the deformation of an object or
medium under shear stress. The shear modulus
is the elastic modulus in this case. Shear stress is
caused by forces acting along the object’s two
parallel surfaces.
12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
• An object or material is elastic if it comes back to
its original shape and size when the stress
vanishes. In elastic deformations with stress
values lower than the proportionality limit, stress
is proportional to strain. When stress goes
beyond the proportionality limit, the deformation
is still elastic but nonlinear up to the elasticity
limit.
• An object or material has plastic behavior when
stress is larger than the elastic limit. In the
plastic region, the object or material does not
come back to its original size or shape when
stress vanishes but acquires a permanent
deformation. Plastic behavior ends at the
breaking point.
Conceptual Questions
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium
1. What can you say about the velocity of a moving
body that is in dynamic equilibrium?
2. Under what conditions can a rotating body be in
equilibrium? Give an example.
3. What three factors affect the torque created by a
force relative to a specific pivot point?
4. Mechanics sometimes put a length of pipe over
the handle of a wrench when trying to remove a
very tight bolt. How does this help?
For the next four problems, evaluate the statement as
either true or false and explain your answer.
5. If there is only one external force (or torque)
acting on an object, it cannot be in equilibrium.
6. If an object is in equilibrium there must be an
even number of forces acting on it.
7. If an odd number of forces act on an object, the
object cannot be in equilibrium.
8. A body moving in a circle with a constant speed
is in rotational equilibrium.
9. What purpose is served by a long and flexible
pole carried by wire-walkers?
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium
10. Is it possible to rest a ladder against a rough
wall when the floor is frictionless?
11. Show how a spring scale and a simple fulcrum
can be used to weigh an object whose weight is
larger than the maximum reading on the scale.
A painter climbs a ladder. Is the ladder more
likely to slip when the painter is near the bottom
or near the top?
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus
Not e: Unless stated otherwise, the weights of the
wires, rods, and other elements are assumed to be
negligible. Elastic moduli of selected materials are
given in Table 12.1.
13. Why can a squirrel jump from a tree branch to
Problems
12.1 Conditions for Static Equilibrium
24. When tightening a bolt, you push
perpendicularly on a wrench with a force of 165
12. 12 • Chapter Review 587
14. 15. 16. 17. the ground and run away undamaged, while a
human could break a bone in such a fall?
When a glass bottle full of vinegar warms up,
both the vinegar and the glass expand, but the
vinegar expands significantly more with
temperature than does the glass. The bottle will
break if it is filled up to its very tight cap. Explain
why and how a pocket of air above the vinegar
prevents the bottle from breaking.
A thin wire strung between two nails in the wall
is used to support a large picture. Is the wire
likely to snap if it is strung tightly or if it is strung
so that it sags considerably?
Review the relationship between stress and
strain. Can you find any similarities between the
two quantities?
What type of stress are you applying when you
press on the ends of a wooden rod? When you
pull on its ends?
Can compressive stress be applied to a rubber
band?
Can Young’s modulus have a negative value?
What about the bulk modulus?
If a hypothetical material has a negative bulk
modulus, what happens when you squeeze a
piece of it?
21. Discuss how you might measure the bulk
modulus of a liquid.
12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
Not e: Unless stated otherwise, the weights of the
wires, rods, and other elements are assumed to be
negligible. Elastic moduli of selected materials are
given in Table 12.1.
22. What is meant when a fishing line is designated
as “a 10-lb test?”
23. Steel rods are commonly placed in concrete
before it sets. What is the purpose of these
rods?
18. 19. 20. N at a distance of 0.140 m from the center of the
bolt. How much torque are you exerting relative
to the center of the bolt?
588 12 • Chapter Review
25. 26. When opening a door, you push on it
perpendicularly with a force of 55.0 N at a
distance of 0.850 m from the hinges. What
torque are you exerting relative to the hinges?
Find the magnitude of the tension in each
supporting cable shown below. In each case, the
weight of the suspended body is 100.0 N and
the masses of the cables are negligible.
structure shown in equilibrium? The weight of the
structure is negligible.
28. Is it possible to apply a force at Pto keep in
equilibrium the structure shown? The weight of the
structure is negligible.
29. 30. 31. Two children push on opposite sides of a door
during play. Both push horizontally and
perpendicular to the door. One child pushes with
a force of 17.5 N at a distance of 0.600 m from
the hinges, and the second child pushes at a
distance of 0.450 m. What force must the
second child exert to keep the door from
moving? Assume friction is negligible.
A small 1000-kg SUV has a wheel base of 3.0 m.
If 60% if its weight rests on the front wheels,
how far behind the front wheels is the wagon’s
center of mass?
The uniform seesaw is balanced at its center of
mass, as seen below. The smaller boy on the right
has a mass of 40.0 kg. What is the mass of his
friend?
27. What force must be applied at point Pto keep the
12.2 Examples of Static Equilibrium
32. A uniform plank rests on a level surface as
shown below. The plank has a mass of 30 kg and
is 6.0 m long. How much mass can be placed at
its right end before it tips? (Hint: When the board
is about to tip over, it makes contact with the
surface only along the edge that becomes a
Access for free at openstax.org
33. 34. 35. 36. momentary axis of rotation.)
The uniform seesaw shown below is balanced on a
fulcrum located 3.0 m from the left end. The smaller
boy on the right has a mass of 40 kg and the bigger
boy on the left has a mass 80 kg. What is the mass
of the board?
In order to get his car out of the mud, a man ties one
end of a rope to the front bumper and the other end
to a tree 15 m away, as shown below. He then pulls
on the center of the rope with a force of 400 N,
which causes its center to be displaced 0.30 m, as
shown. What is the force of the rope on the car?
A uniform 40.0-kg scaffold of length 6.0 m is
supported by two light cables, as shown below. An
80.0-kg painter stands 1.0 m from the left end of the
scaffold, and his painting equipment is 1.5 m from
the right end. If the tension in the left cable is twice
that in the right cable, find the tensions in the cables
and the mass of the equipment.
When the structure shown below is supported at
point P , it is in equilibrium. Find the magnitude of
force Fand the force applied at P . The weight of the
structure is negligible.
37. 38. 39. 12 • Chapter Review 589
To get up on the roof, a person (mass 70.0 kg)
places a 6.00-m aluminum ladder (mass 10.0
kg) against the house on a concrete pad with the
base of the ladder 2.00 m from the house. The
ladder rests against a plastic rain gutter, which
we can assume to be frictionless. The center of
mass of the ladder is 2.00 m from the bottom.
The person is standing 3.00 m from the bottom.
Find the normal reaction and friction forces on
the ladder at its base.
A uniform horizontal strut weighs 400.0 N. One
end of the strut is attached to a hinged support
at the wall, and the other end of the strut is
attached to a sign that weighs 200.0 N. The strut
is also supported by a cable attached between
the end of the strut and the wall. Assuming that
the entire weight of the sign is attached at the
very end of the strut, find the tension in the
cable and the force at the hinge of the strut.
The forearm shown below is positioned at an
angle with respect to the upper arm, and a
5.0-kg mass is held in the hand. The total mass
of the forearm and hand is 3.0 kg, and their
590 12 • Chapter Review
center of mass is 15.0 cm from the elbow. (a)
What is the magnitude of the force that the
biceps muscle exerts on the forearm for
(b) What is the magnitude of the force
on the elbow joint for the same angle? (c) How
do these forces depend on the angle
40. The uniform boom shown below weighs 3000 N.
It is supported by the horizontal guy wire and by
the hinged support at point A . What are the
forces on the boom due to the wire and due to
the support at A ? Does the force at Aact along
the boom?
41. The uniform boom shown below weighs 700 N,
and the object hanging from its right end weighs
400 N. The boom is supported by a light cable
and by a hinge at the wall. Calculate the tension
in the cable and the force on the hinge on the
boom. Does the force on the hinge act along the
boom?
Access for free at openstax.org
42. 43. A 12.0-m boom, AB , of a crane lifting a 3000-kg load
is shown below. The center of mass of the boom is
at its geometric center, and the mass of the boom is
1000 kg. For the position shown, calculate tension T
in the cable and the force at the axle A .
A uniform trapdoor shown below is 1.0 m by 1.5
m and weighs 300 N. It is supported by a single
hinge (H), and by a light rope tied between the
middle of the door and the floor. The door is held
at the position shown, where its slab makes a
angle with the horizontal floor and the rope
makes a angle with the floor. Find the
tension in the rope and the force at the hinge.
12.3 Stress, Strain, and Elastic Modulus
45. 46. 47. 48. The “lead” in pencils is a graphite composition
with a Young’s modulus of approximately
Calculate the change in length
of the lead in an automatic pencil if you tap it
straight into the pencil with a force of 4.0 N. The
lead is 0.50 mm in diameter and 60 mm long.
TV broadcast antennas are the tallest artificial
structures on Earth. In 1987, a 72.0-kg physicist
placed himself and 400 kg of equipment at the
top of a 610-m-high antenna to perform gravity
experiments. By how much was the antenna
compressed, if we consider it to be equivalent to
a steel cylinder 0.150 m in radius?
By how much does a 65.0-kg mountain climber
stretch her 0.800-cm diameter nylon rope when
she hangs 35.0 m below a rock outcropping?
(For nylon,
When water freezes, its volume increases by
9.05%. What force per unit area is water capable
of exerting on a container when it freezes?
49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 12 • Chapter Review 591
44. A 90-kg man walks on a sawhorse, as shown
below. The sawhorse is 2.0 m long and 1.0 m
high, and its mass is 25.0 kg. Calculate the
normal reaction force on each leg at the contact
point with the floor when the man is 0.5 m from
the far end of the sawhorse. (Hint: At each end,
find the total reaction force first. This reaction
force is the vector sum of two reaction forces,
each acting along one leg. The normal reaction
force at the contact point with the floor is the
normal (with respect to the floor) component of
this force.)
A farmer making grape juice fills a glass bottle to
the brim and caps it tightly. The juice expands
more than the glass when it warms up, in such a
way that the volume increases by 0.2%.
Calculate the force exerted by the juice per
square centimeter if its bulk modulus is
assuming the bottle does not
break.
A disk between vertebrae in the spine is
subjected to a shearing force of 600.0 N. Find its
shear deformation, using the shear modulus of
The disk is equivalent to a
solid cylinder 0.700 cm high and 4.00 cm in
diameter.
A vertebra is subjected to a shearing force of
500.0 N. Find the shear deformation, taking the
vertebra to be a cylinder 3.00 cm high and 4.00
cm in diameter.
Calculate the force a piano tuner applies to
stretch a steel piano wire by 8.00 mm, if the wire
is originally 1.35 m long and its diameter is
0.850 mm.
A 20.0-m-tall hollow aluminum flagpole is
equivalent in strength to a solid cylinder 4.00 cm
in diameter. A strong wind bends the pole as
much as a horizontal 900.0-N force on the top
would do. How far to the side does the top of the
pole flex?
A copper wire of diameter 1.0 cm stretches
1.0% when it is used to lift a load upward with
an acceleration of What is the weight
of the load?
As an oil well is drilled, each new section of drill
pipe supports its own weight and the weight of
the pipe and the drill bit beneath it. Calculate the
stretch in a new 6.00-m-long steel pipe that
supports a 100-kg drill bit and a 3.00-km length
of pipe with a linear mass density of 20.0 kg/m.
Treat the pipe as a solid cylinder with a 5.00-cm
diameter.
A large uniform cylindrical steel rod of density
is 2.0 m long and has a diameter
of 5.0 cm. The rod is fastened to a concrete floor
with its long axis vertical. What is the normal
stress in the rod at the cross-section located at
(a) 1.0 m from its lower end? (b) 1.5 m from the
lower end?
A 90-kg mountain climber hangs from a nylon
rope and stretches it by 25.0 cm. If the rope was
592 12 • Chapter Review
originally 30.0 m long and its diameter is 1.0 cm,
what is Young’s modulus for the nylon?
58. A suspender rod of a suspension bridge is 25.0
m long. If the rod is made of steel, what must its
diameter be so that it does not stretch more
than 1.0 cm when a truck passes
by it? Assume that the rod supports all of the
weight of the truck.
59. A copper wire is 1.0 m long and its diameter is
1.0 mm. If the wire hangs vertically, how much
weight must be added to its free end in order to
stretch it 3.0 mm?
60. A 100-N weight is attached to a free end of a
metallic wire that hangs from the ceiling. When a
second 100-N weight is added to the wire, it
stretches 3.0 mm. The diameter and the length
of the wire are 1.0 mm and 2.0 m, respectively.
What is Young’s modulus of the metal used to
manufacture the wire?
61. The bulk modulus of a material is
What fractional change in
volume does a piece of this material undergo
when it is subjected to a bulk stress increase of
Assume that the force is applied
uniformly over the surface.
62. Normal forces of magnitude are
applied uniformly to a spherical surface
enclosing a volume of a liquid. This causes the
radius of the surface to decrease from 50.000
cm to 49.995 cm. What is the bulk modulus of
the liquid?
63. During a walk on a rope, a tightrope walker
creates a tension of in a wire that
is stretched between two supporting poles that
are 15.0 m apart. The wire has a diameter of
0.50 cm when it is not stretched. When the
walker is on the wire in the middle between the
poles the wire makes an angle of below the
horizontal. How much does this tension stretch
the steel wire when the walker is this position?
64. When using a pencil eraser, you exert a vertical
force of 6.00 N at a distance of 2.00 cm from the
hardwood-eraser joint. The pencil is 6.00 mm in
diameter and is held at an angle of to the
horizontal. (a) By how much does the wood flex
perpendicular to its length? (b) How much is it
compressed lengthwise?
65. Normal forces are applied uniformly over the
surface of a spherical volume of water whose
radius is 20.0 cm. If the pressure on the surface
is increased by 200 MPa, by how much does the
radius of the sphere decrease?
12.4 Elasticity and Plasticity
66. A uniform rope of cross-sectional area
breaks when the tensile stress in it reaches
(a) What is the maximum
load that can be lifted slowly at a constant speed
by the rope? (b) What is the maximum load that
can be lifted by the rope with an acceleration of
67. One end of a vertical metallic wire of length 2.0 m and
diameter 1.0 mm is attached to a ceiling, and the other
end is attached to a 5.0-N weight pan, as shown below.
The position of the pointer before the pan is 4.000 cm.
Different weights are then added to the pan area, and
the position of the pointer is recorded in the table
shown. Plot stress versus strain for this wire, then use
the resulting curve to determine Young’s modulus and
the proportionality limit of the metal. What metal is this
most likely to be?
Added load (including
pan)
(N)
Scale reading
(cm)
0 4.000
15 4.036
25 4.073
35 4.109
45 4.146
55 4.181
65 4.221
75 4.266
85 4.316
Access for free at openstax.org
Additional Problems
69. The coefficient of static friction between the
rubber eraser of the pencil and the tabletop is
If the force is applied along the
axis of the pencil, as shown below, what is the
minimum angle at which the pencil can stand
without slipping? Ignore the weight of the pencil.
70. A pencil rests against a corner, as shown below.
The sharpened end of the pencil touches a
smooth vertical surface and the eraser end
touches a rough horizontal floor. The coefficient
of static friction between the eraser and the
floor is The center of mass of the
pencil is located 9.0 cm from the tip of the
eraser and 11.0 cm from the tip of the pencil
lead. Find the minimum angle for which the
pencil does not slip.
12 • Chapter Review 593
68. An aluminum wire is
suspended from the ceiling and hangs vertically.
How long must the wire be before the stress at
its upper end reaches the proportionality limit,
which is
71. A uniform 4.0-m plank weighing 200.0 N rests
against the corner of a wall, as shown below. There
is no friction at the point where the plank meets the
corner. (a) Find the forces that the corner and the
floor exert on the plank. (b) What is the minimum
coefficient of static friction between the floor and
the plank to prevent the plank from slipping?
594 12 • Chapter Review
72. A 40-kg boy jumps from a height of 3.0 m, lands
on one foot and comes to rest in 0.10 s after he
hits the ground. Assume that he comes to rest
with a constant acceleration opposite to the
motion. If the total cross-sectional area of the
bones in his legs just above his ankles is
what is the compression stress in these
bones? Leg bones can be fractured when they
are subjected to stress greater than
Is the boy in danger of breaking
his leg?
73. Two thin rods, one made of steel and the other
Challenge Problems
75. A horizontal force is applied to a uniform sphere in
direction exact toward the center of the sphere, as
shown below. Find the magnitude of this force so
that the sphere remains in static equilibrium. What
is the frictional force of the incline on the sphere?
76. When a motor is set on a pivoted mount seen
below, its weight can be used to maintain
tension in the drive belt. When the motor is not
running the tensions and are equal. The
total mass of the platform and the motor is
100.0 kg, and the diameter of the drive belt
pulley is when the motor is off, find: (a)
the tension in the belt, and (b) the force at the
hinged platform support at point C . Assume that
the center of mass of the motor plus platform is
at the center of the motor.
Access for free at openstax.org
74. 77. 78. of aluminum, are joined end to end. Each rod is
2.0 m long and has cross-sectional area
If a 10,000-N tensile force is applied
at each end of the combination, find: (a) stress in
each rod; (b) strain in each rod; and, (c)
elongation of each rod.
Two rods, one made of copper and the other of
steel, have the same dimensions. If the copper
rod stretches by 0.15 mm under some stress,
how much does the steel rod stretch under the
same stress?
Two wheels Aand Bwith weights w and 2w,
respectively, are connected by a uniform rod
with weight w/2, as shown below. The wheels
are free to roll on the sloped surfaces.
Determine the angle that the rod forms with the
horizontal when the system is in equilibrium.
Hint: There are five forces acting on the rod,
which is two weights of the wheels, two normal
reaction forces at points where the wheels make
contacts with the wedge, and the weight of the
rod.
Weights are gradually added to a pan until a wheel
of mass Mand radius Ris pulled over an obstacle of
height d , as shown below. What is the minimum
mass of the weights plus the pan needed to
accomplish this?
79. In order to lift a shovelful of dirt, a gardener pushes
downward on the end of the shovel and pulls
upward at distance from the end, as shown
below. The weight of the shovel is and acts at
the point of application of Calculate the
magnitudes of the forces and as functions of
mg, and the weight Wof the load. Why do
your answers not depend on the angle that the
shovel makes with the horizontal?
80. A uniform rod of length 2Rand mass Mis
attached to a small collar Cand rests on a
cylindrical surface of radius R , as shown below.
If the collar can slide without friction along the
vertical guide, find the angle for which the rod
is in static equilibrium.
81. 12 • Chapter Review 595
The pole shown below is at a bend in a
power line and is therefore subjected to more
shear force than poles in straight parts of the
line. The tension in each line is at
the angles shown. The pole is 15.0 m tall, has an
18.0 cm diameter, and can be considered to
have half the strength of hardwood. (a) Calculate
the compression of the pole. (b) Find how much
it bends and in what direction. (c) Find the
tension in a guy wire used to keep the pole
straight if it is attached to the top of the pole at
an angle of with the vertical. The guy wire
is in the opposite direction of the bend.
596 12 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 13
Gravitation
FIGURE 13.1 Our visible Universe contains billions of galaxies, whose very existence is due to the force of gravity. Gravity is ultimately
responsible for the energy output of all stars—initiating thermonuclear reactions in stars, allowing the Sun to heat Earth, and making
galaxies visible from unfathomable distances. Most of the dots you see in this image are not stars, but galaxies. (credit: modification of
work by NASA/ESA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
13.6 Tidal Forces
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we study the nature of the gravitational force for objects as small as ourselves and
for systems as massive as entire galaxies. We show how the gravitational force affects objects on Earth and the
motion of the Universe itself. Gravity is the first force to be postulated as an action-at-a-distance force, that is,
objects exert a gravitational force on one another without physical contact and that force falls to zero only at an
infinite distance. Earth exerts a gravitational force on you, but so do our Sun, the Milky Way galaxy, and the billions of
galaxies, like those shown above, which are so distant that we cannot see them with the naked eye.
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List the significant milestones in the history of gravitation
• Calculate the gravitational force between two point masses
• Estimate the gravitational force between collections of mass
We first review the history of the study of gravitation, with emphasis on those phenomena that for thousands of
598 13 • Gravitation
years have inspired philosophers and scientists to search for an explanation. Then we examine the simplest form of
Newton’s law of universal gravitation and how to apply it.
The History of Gravitation
The earliest philosophers wondered why objects naturally tend to fall toward the ground. Aristotle (384–322 BCE)
believed that it was the nature of rocks to seek Earth and the nature of fire to seek the Heavens. Brahmagupta
(598~665 CE) postulated that Earth was a sphere and that objects possessed a natural affinity for it, falling toward
the center from wherever they were located.
The motions of the Sun, our Moon, and the planets have been studied for thousands of years as well. These motions
were described with amazing accuracy by Ptolemy (90–168 CE), whose method of epicycles described the paths of
the planets as circles within circles. However, there is little evidence that anyone connected the motion of
astronomical bodies with the motion of objects falling to Earth—until the seventeenth century.
The idea of heliocentrism, in which the Sun is at the center of the solar system, dates at least as far back as
Aristarchus of Samos in the third century BCE, but attracted little attention, and Ptolemy’s geocentric (Earth-
centered) model held sway in Europe until the sixteenth century. Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) is generally
credited as being the first to produce a mathematical model of a heliocentric system and to challenge Ptolemy’s
geocentric system. This idea was supported by the incredibly precise naked-eye measurements of planetary
motions by Tycho Brahe and their analysis by Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei. Kepler showed that the motion of
each planet is an ellipse (the first of his three laws, discussed in Kepler’s Laws of Planetary Motion), and Robert
Hooke (the same Hooke who formulated Hooke’s law for springs) intuitively suggested that these motions are due to
the planets being attracted to the Sun. However, it was Isaac Newton who connected the acceleration of objects
near Earth’s surface with the centripetal acceleration of the Moon in its orbit about Earth.
Other prominent scientists and mathematicians of the time, particularly those outside of England, were reluctant to
accept Newton's principles. It took the work of another prominent philosopher, writer, and scientist, Émilie du
Châtelet, to establish the Newtonian gravitation as the accurate and overarching law. Du Châtelet, who had earlier
laid the foundation for the understanding of conservation of energy as well as the principle that light had no mass,
translated and augmented Newton's key work. She also utilized calculus to explain gravity, which helped lead to its
acceptance.
Finally, in Einstein’s Theory of Gravity, we look at the theory of general relativity proposed by Albert Einstein in
1916. His theory comes from a vastly different perspective, in which gravity is a manifestation of mass warping
space and time. The consequences of his theory gave rise to many remarkable predictions, essentially all of which
have been confirmed over the many decades following the publication of the theory (including the 2015
measurement of gravitational waves from the merger of two black holes).
Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation
Newton noted that objects at Earth’s surface (hence at a distance of from the center of Earth) have an
acceleration of g, but the Moon, at a distance of about , has a centripetal acceleration about times
smaller than g. He could explain this by postulating that a force exists between any two objects, whose magnitude is
given by the product of the two masses divided by the square of the distance between them. We now know that this
inverse square law is ubiquitous in nature, a function of geometry for point sources. The strength of any source at a
distance r is spread over the surface of a sphere centered about the mass. The surface area of that sphere is
proportional to . In later chapters, we see this same form in the electromagnetic force.
NEWTON’S LAW OF GRAVITATION
Newton’s law of gravitation can be expressed as
13.1
where is the force on object 1 exerted by object 2 and is a unit vector that points from object 1 toward
Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 • Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation 599
object 2.
As shown in Figure 13.2, the force between the objects. The equal but opposite force vector points from object 1 toward object 2, and hence represents an attractive
is the force on object 2 exerted by object 1.
FIGURE 13.2 Gravitational force acts along a line joining the centers of mass of two objects.
These equal but opposite forces reflect Newton’s third law, which we discussed earlier. Note that strictly speaking,
Equation 13.1 applies to point masses—all the mass is located at one point. But it applies equally to any spherically
symmetric objects, where r is the distance between the centers of mass of those objects. In many cases, it works
reasonably well for nonsymmetrical objects, if their separation is large compared to their size, and we take r to be
the distance between the center of mass of each body.
The Cavendish Experiment
A century after Newton published his law of universal gravitation, Henry Cavendish determined the proportionality
constant Gby performing a painstaking experiment. He constructed a device similar to that shown in Figure 13.3, in
which small masses are suspended from a wire. Once in equilibrium, two fixed, larger masses are placed
symmetrically near the smaller ones. The gravitational attraction creates a torsion (twisting) in the supporting wire
that can be measured.
The constant Gis called the universal gravitational constant and Cavendish determined it to be
. The word ‘universal’ indicates that scientists think that this constant applies to
masses of any composition and that it is the same throughout the Universe. The value of Gis an incredibly small
number, showing that the force of gravity is very weak. The attraction between masses as small as our bodies, or
even objects the size of skyscrapers, is incredibly small. For example, two 1.0-kg masses located 1.0 meter apart
exert a force of on each other. This is the weight of a typical grain of pollen.
600 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.3 Cavendish used an apparatus similar to this to measure the gravitational attraction between two spheres (m) suspended from
a wire and two stationary spheres (M ). This is a common experiment performed in undergraduate laboratories, but it is quite challenging.
Passing trucks outside the laboratory can create vibrations that overwhelm the gravitational forces.
Although gravity is the weakest of the four fundamental forces of nature, its attractive nature is what holds us to
Earth, causes the planets to orbit the Sun and the Sun to orbit our galaxy, and binds galaxies into clusters, ranging
from a few to millions. Gravity is the force that forms the Universe.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Newton’s Law of Gravitation
To determine the motion caused by the gravitational force, follow these steps:
1. 2. 3. Identify the two masses, one or both, for which you wish to find the gravitational force.
Draw a free-body diagram, sketching the force acting on each mass and indicating the distance between their
centers of mass.
Apply Newton’s second law of motion to each mass to determine how it will move.
EXAMPLE 13.1
A Collision in Orbit
Consider two nearly spherical So yuz payload vehicles, in orbit about Earth, each with mass 9000 kg and diameter
4.0 m. They are initially at rest relative to each other, 10.0 m from center to center. (As we will see in Kepler’s Laws
of Planetary Motion, both orbit Earth at the same speed and interact nearly the same as if they were isolated in deep
space.) Determine the gravitational force between them and their initial acceleration. Estimate how long it takes for
them to drift together, and how fast they are moving upon impact.
Strategy
We use Newton’s law of gravitation to determine the force between them and then use Newton’s second law to find
the acceleration of each. For the estimat e, we find the final acceleration as well and assume the acceleration is
constant at its average value, and we use the constant-acceleration equations from Motion along a Straight Line to
find the time and speed of the collision.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.1 • Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation 601
Solution
The magnitude of the force is
The initial acceleration of each payload is
The vehicles are 4.0 m in diameter, so the vehicles move from 10.0 m to 4.0 m apart, or a distance of 3.0 m each. A
similar calculation to that above, for when the vehicles are 4.0 m apart, yields an acceleration of ,
and the average of these two values is . If we assume a constant acceleration of this value and
they start from rest, then the vehicles collide with speed given by
so
We use to find or about 4.6 hours.
Significance
These calculations—including the initial force—are only estimates, as the vehicles are probably not spherically
symmetrical. But you can see that the force is incredibly small. Astronauts must tether themselves when doing work
outside even the massive International Space Station (ISS), as in Figure 13.4, because the gravitational attraction
cannot save them from even the smallest push away from the station.
FIGURE 13.4 This photo shows Ed White tethered to the Space Shuttle during a spacewalk. (credit: NASA)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.1
What happens to force and acceleration as the vehicles fall together? What will our estimate of the velocity at a
collision higher or lower than the speed actually be? And finally, what would happen if the masses were not
602 13 • Gravitation
identical? Would the force on each be the same or different? How about their accelerations?
The effect of gravity between two objects with masses on the order of these space vehicles is indeed small. Yet, the
effect of gravity on you from Earth is significant enough that a fall into Earth of only a few feet can be dangerous. We
examine the force of gravity near Earth’s surface in the next section.
EXAMPLE 13.2
Attraction between Galaxies
Find the acceleration of our galaxy, the Milky Way, due to the nearest comparably sized galaxy, the Andromeda
galaxy (Figure 13.5). The approximate mass of each galaxy is 800 billion solar masses (a solar mass is the mass of
our Sun), and they are separated by 2.5 million light-years. (Note that the mass of Andromeda is not so well known
but is believed to be slightly larger than our galaxy.) Each galaxy has a diameter of roughly 100,000 light-years
.
FIGURE 13.5 Galaxies interact gravitationally over immense distances. The Andromeda galaxy is the nearest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way,
and they will eventually collide. (credit: Boris Štromar)
Strategy
As in the preceding example, we use Newton’s law of gravitation to determine the force between them and then use
Newton’s second law to find the acceleration of the Milky Way. We can consider the galaxies to be point masses,
since their sizes are about 25 times smaller than their separation. The mass of the Sun (see Appendix D) is
and a light-year is the distance light travels in one year, .
Solution
The magnitude of the force is
The acceleration of the Milky Way is
Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 • Gravitation Near Earth's Surface 603
Significance
Does this value of acceleration seem astoundingly small? If they start from rest, then they would accelerate directly
toward each other, “colliding” at their center of mass. Let’s estimate the time for this to happen. The initial
acceleration is , so using , we see that it would take for each galaxy to reach a speed of
1.0 m/s, and they would be only closer. That is nine orders of magnitude smaller than the initial
distance between them. In reality, such motions are rarely simple. These two galaxies, along with about 50 other
smaller galaxies, are all gravitationally bound into our local cluster. Our local cluster is gravitationally bound to other
clusters in what is called a supercluster. All of this is part of the great cosmic dance that results from gravitation, as
shown in Figure 13.6.
FIGURE 13.6 Based on the results of this example, plus what astronomers have observed elsewhere in the Universe, our galaxy will collide
with the Andromeda Galaxy in about 4 billion years. (credit: modification of work by NASA; ESA; A. Feild and R. van der Marel, STScI)
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the connection between the constants and
• Determine the mass of an astronomical body from free-fall acceleration at its surface
• Describe how the value of varies due to location and Earth’s rotation
In this section, we observe how Newton’s law of gravitation applies at the surface of a planet and how it connects
with what we learned earlier about free fall. We also examine the gravitational effects within spherical bodies.
Weight
Recall that the acceleration of a free-falling object near Earth’s surface is approximately . The force
causing this acceleration is called the weight of the object, and from Newton’s second law, it has the value mg. This
weight is present regardless of whether the object is in free fall. We now know that this force is the gravitational
force between the object and Earth. If we substitute mg for the magnitude of in Newton’s law of universal
gravitation, m for , and for , we obtain the scalar equation
604 13 • Gravitation
where r is the distance between the centers of mass of the object and Earth. The mass m of the object cancels,
leaving
13.2
The average radius of Earth is about 6370 km. Hence, for objects within a few kilometers of Earth’s surface, we can
take (Figure 13.7). This explains why all masses free fall with the same acceleration. We have ignored the
fact that Earth also accelerates toward the falling object, but that is acceptable as long as the mass of Earth is much
larger than that of the object.
FIGURE 13.7 We can take the distance between the centers of mass of Earth and an object on its surface to be the radius of Earth, provided
that its size is much less than the radius of Earth.
EXAMPLE 13.3
Masses of Earth and Moon
Have you ever wondered how we know the mass of Earth? We certainly can’t place it on a scale. The values of g and
the radius of Earth were measured with reasonable accuracy centuries ago.
a. b. Use the standard values of g, , and Equation 13.2 to find the mass of Earth.
Estimate the value of g on the Moon. Use the fact that the Moon has a radius of about 1700 km (a value of this
accuracy was determined many centuries ago) and assume it has the same average density as Earth,
.
Strategy
With the known values of g and , we can use Equation 13.2 to find . For the Moon, we use the assumption of
equal average density to determine the mass from a ratio of the volumes of Earth and the Moon.
Solution
a. Rearranging Equation 13.2, we have
b. The volume of a sphere is proportional to the radius cubed, so a simple ratio gives us
Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 • Gravitation Near Earth's Surface 605
We now use Equation 13.2.
Significance
As soon as Cavendish determined the value of Gin 1798, the mass of Earth could be calculated. (In fact, that was
the ultimate purpose of Cavendish’s experiment in the first place.) The value we calculated for g of the Moon is
incorrect. The average density of the Moon is actually only and at the surface. Newton
attempted to measure the mass of the Moon by comparing the effect of the Sun on Earth’s ocean tides compared to
that of the Moon. His value was a factor of two too small. The most accurate values for g and the mass of the Moon
come from tracking the motion of spacecraft that have orbited the Moon. But the mass of the Moon can actually be
determined accurately without going to the Moon. Earth and the Moon orbit about a common center of mass, and
careful astronomical measurements can determine that location. The ratio of the Moon’s mass to Earth’s is the ratio
of [the distance from the common center of mass to the Moon’s center] to [the distance from the common center of
mass to Earth’s center].
Later in this chapter, we will see that the mass of other astronomical bodies also can be determined by the period of
small satellites orbiting them. But until Cavendish determined the value of G , the masses of all these bodies were
unknown.
EXAMPLE 13.4
Gravity above Earth’s Surface
What is the value of g 400 km above Earth’s surface, where the International Space Station is in orbit?
Strategy
Using the value of and noting the radius is , we use Equation 13.2 to find g.
From Equation 13.2 we have
Significance
We often see video of astronauts in space stations, apparently weightless. But clearly, the force of gravity is acting
on them. Comparing the value of g we just calculated to that on Earth , we see that the astronauts in the
International Space Station still have 88% of their weight. They only appear to be weightless because they are in
free fall. We will come back to this in Satellite Orbits and Energy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.2
How does your weight at the top of a tall building compare with that on the first floor? Do you think engineers need
to take into account the change in the value of g when designing structural support for a very tall building?
The Gravitational Field
Equation 13.2 is a scalar equation, giving the magnitude of the gravitational acceleration as a function of the
distance from the center of the mass that causes the acceleration. But we could have retained the vector form for
the force of gravity in Equation 13.1, and written the acceleration in vector form as
606 13 • Gravitation
We identify the vector field represented by as the gravitational field caused by mass . We can picture the field
as shown Figure 13.8. The lines are directed radially inward and are symmetrically distributed about the mass.
FIGURE 13.8 Field line representation of the gravitational field created by Earth.
The direction of is parallel to the field lines at any point. The strength of at any point is inversely proportional to
the line spacing. Another way to state this is that the magnitude of the field in any region is proportional to the
number of lines that pass through a unit surface area, effectively a density of lines. Since the lines are equally
spaced in all directions, the number of lines per unit surface area at a distance r from the mass is the total number
of lines divided by the surface area of a sphere of radius r, which is proportional to . Hence, this picture perfectly
represents the inverse square law, in addition to indicating the direction of the field. In the field picture, we say that
a mass m interacts with the gravitational field of mass M . We will use the concept of fields to great advantage in the
later chapters on electromagnetism.
Apparent Weight: Accounting for Earth’s Rotation
As we saw in Applications of Newton’s Laws, objects moving at constant speed in a circle have a centripetal
acceleration directed toward the center of the circle, which means that there must be a net force directed toward
the center of that circle. Since all objects on the surface of Earth move through a circle every 24 hours, there must
be a net centripetal force on each object directed toward the center of that circle.
Let’s first consider an object of mass m located at the equator, suspended from a scale (Figure 13.9). The scale
exerts an upward force away from Earth’s center. This is the reading on the scale, and hence it is the apparent
weight of the object. The weight (mg) points toward Earth’s center. If Earth were not rotating, the acceleration
would be zero and, consequently, the net force would be zero, resulting in . This would be the true reading
of the weight.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 • Gravitation Near Earth's Surface 607
FIGURE 13.9 For a person standing at the equator, the centripetal acceleration is in the same direction as the force of gravity. At
latitude , the angle the between and the force of gravity is and the magnitude of decreases with .
With rotation, the sum of these forces must provide the centripetal acceleration, . Using Newton’s second law, we
have
13.3
Note that points in the same direction as the weight; hence, it is negative. The tangential speed v is the speed at
the equator and r is . We can calculate the speed simply by noting that objects on the equator travel the
circumference of Earth in 24 hours. Instead, let’s use the alternative expression for from Motion in Two and Three
Dimensions. Recall that the tangential speed is related to the angular speed by . Hence, we have
. By rearranging Equation 13.3 and substituting , the apparent weight at the equator is
The angular speed of Earth everywhere is
Substituting for the values or so it is clearly a small correction.
and , we have . This is only 0.34% of the value of gravity,
608 13 • Gravitation
EXAMPLE 13.5
Zero Apparent Weight
How fast would Earth need to spin for those at the equator to have zero apparent weight? How long would the length
of the day be?
Strategy
Using Equation 13.3, we can set the apparent weight ( ) to zero and determine the centripetal acceleration
required. From that, we can find the speed at the equator. The length of day is the time required for one complete
rotation.
Solution
From Equation 13.2, we have , so setting for , substituting for Earth’s radius and the standard value of gravity, we get
, we get . Using the expression
The period Tis the time for one complete rotation. Therefore, the tangential speed is the circumference divided by
T , so we have
This is about 84 minutes.
Significance
We will see later in this chapter that this speed and length of day would also be the orbital speed and period of a
satellite in orbit at Earth’s surface. While such an orbit would not be possible near Earth’s surface due to air
resistance, it certainly is possible only a few hundred miles above Earth.
Results Away from the Equator
At the pole, and , just as is the case without rotation. At any other latitude , the situation
is more complicated. The centripetal acceleration is directed toward point Pin the figure, and the radius becomes
. The vect or sum of the weight and must point toward point P , hence no longer points away from
the center of Earth. (The difference is small and exaggerated in the figure.) A plumb bob will always point along this
deviated direction. All buildings are built aligned along this deviated direction, not along a radius through the center
of Earth. For the tallest buildings, this represents a deviation of a few feet at the top.
It is also worth noting that Earth is not a perfect sphere. The interior is partially liquid, and this enhances Earth
bulging at the equator due to its rotation. The radius of Earth is about 30 km greater at the equator compared to the
poles. It is left as an exercise to compare the strength of gravity at the poles to that at the equator using Equation
13.2. The difference is comparable to the difference due to rotation and is in the same direction. Apparently, you
really can lose “weight” by moving to the tropics.
Gravity Away from the Surface
Earlier we stated without proof that the law of gravitation applies to spherically symmetrical objects, where the
mass of each body acts as if it were at the center of the body. Since Equation 13.2 is derived from Equation 13.1, it is
Access for free at openstax.org
13.2 • Gravitation Near Earth's Surface 609
also valid for symmetrical mass distributions, but both equations are valid only for values of . As we saw in
Example 13.4, at 400 km above Earth’s surface, where the International Space Station orbits, the value of g is
. (We will see later that this is also the centripetal acceleration of the ISS.)
For , Equation 13.1 and Equation 13.2 are not valid. However, we can determine g for these cases using a
principle that comes from Gauss’s law, which is a powerful mathematical tool that we study in more detail later in
the course. A consequence of Gauss’s law, applied to gravitation, is that only the mass within r contributes to the
gravitational force. Also, that mass, just as before, can be considered to be located at the center. The gravitational
effect of the mass outside r has zero net effect.
Two very interesting special cases occur. For a spherical planet with constant density, the mass within r is the
density times the volume within r. This mass can be considered located at the center. Replacing with only the
mass within r, , and with r, Equation 13.2 becomes
The value of g, and hence your weight, decreases linearly as you descend down a hole to the center of the spherical
planet. At the center, you are weightless, as the mass of the planet pulls equally in all directions. Actually, Earth’s
density is not constant, nor is Earth solid throughout. Figure 13.10 shows the profile of g if Earth had constant
density and the more likely profile based upon estimates of density derived from seismic data.
FIGURE 13.10 For , the value of g for the case of constant density is the straight green line. The blue line from the PREM
(Preliminary Reference Earth Model) is probably closer to the actual profile for g.
The second interesting case concerns living on a spherical shell planet. This scenario has been proposed in many
science fiction stories. Ignoring significant engineering issues, the shell could be constructed with a desired radius
and total mass, such that g at the surface is the same as Earth’s. Can you guess what happens once you descend in
an elevator to the inside of the shell, where there is no mass between you and the center? What benefits would this
provide for traveling great distances from one point on the sphere to another? And finally, what effect would there
610 13 • Gravitation
be if the planet was spinning?
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine changes in gravitational potential energy over great distances
• Apply conservation of energy to determine escape velocity
• Determine whether astronomical bodies are gravitationally bound
We studied gravitational potential energy in Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy, where the value of g
remained constant. We now develop an expression that works over distances such that g is not constant. This is
necessary to correctly calculate the energy needed to place satellites in orbit or to send them on missions in space.
Gravitational Potential Energy beyond Earth
We defined work and potential energy in Work and Kinetic Energy and Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy.
The usefulness of those definitions is the ease with which we can solve many problems using conservation of
energy. Potential energy is particularly useful for forces that change with position, as the gravitational force does
over large distances. In Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy, we showed that the change in gravitational
potential energy near Earth’s surface is . This works very well if g does not change significantly
between and . We return to the definition of work and potential energy to derive an expression that is correct
over larger distances.
Recall that work (W ) is the integral of the dot product between force and distance. Essentially, it is the product of the
component of a force along a displacement times that displacement. We define as the neg ative of the work
done by the force we associate with the potential energy. For clarity, we derive an expression for moving a mass m
from distance from the center of Earth to distance . However, the result can easily be generalized to any two
objects changing their separation from one value to another.
Consider Figure 13.11, in which we take m from a distance from Earth’s center to a distance that is from the
center. Gravity is a conservative force (its magnitude and direction are functions of location only), so we can take any
path we wish, and the result for the calculation of work is the same. We take the path shown, as it greatly simplifies
the integration. We first move radial l y outward from distance to distance , and then move along the arc of a
circle until we reach the final position. During the radial portion, is opposite to the direction we travel along , so
Along the arc, is perpendicular to , so . No work is done as we move
along the arc. Using the expression for the gravitational force and noting the values for along the two
segments of our path, we have
Since , we can adopt a simple expression for :
13.4
Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 • Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy 611
FIGURE 13.11 The work integral, which determines the change in potential energy, can be evaluated along the path shown in red.
Note two important items with this definition. First, ∞. The potential energy is zero when the two
masses are infinitely far apart. Only the difference in Uis important, so the choice of ∞ is merely one
of convenience. (Recall that in earlier gravity problems, you were free to take at the top or bottom of a
building, or anywhere.) Second, note that Ubecomes increasingly more negative as the masses get closer. That is
consistent with what you learned about potential energy in Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy. As the two
masses are separated, positive work must be done against the force of gravity, and hence, Uincreases (becomes
less negative). All masses naturally fall together under the influence of gravity, falling from a higher to a lower
potential energy.
EXAMPLE 13.6
Lifting a Payload
above the surface?
How much energy is required to lift the 9000-kg So yuz vehicle from Earth’s surface to the height of the ISS, 400 km
Strategy
Use Equation 13.2 to find the change in potential energy of the payload. That amount of work or energy must be
supplied to lift the payload.
Solution
Paying attention to the fact that we start at Earth’s surface and end at 400 km above the surface, the change in Uis
We insert the values
and convert 400 km into potential energy, as we would expect.
. We find . It is positive, indicating an increase in
Significance
of
For perspective, consider that the average US household energy use in 2013 was 909 kWh per month. That is energy
612 13 • Gravitation
So our result is an energy expenditure equivalent to 10 months. But this is just the energy needed to raise the
payload 400 km. If we want the So yuz to be in orbit so it can rendezvous with the ISS and not just fall back to Earth,
it needs a lot of kinetic energy. As we see in the next section, that kinetic energy is about five times that of . In
addition, far more energy is expended lifting the propulsion system itself. Space travel is not cheap.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.3
Why not use the simpler expression result, in Example 13.4, that the value g at 400 km above the Earth is ? How significant would the error be? (Recall the previous
.)
Conservation of Energy
In Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy, we described how to apply conservation of energy for systems with
conservative forces. We were able to solve many problems, particularly those involving gravity, more simply using
conservation of energy. Those principles and problem-solving strategies apply equally well here. The only change is
to place the new expression for potential energy into the conservation of energy equation,
.
13.5
Note that we use M , rather than we still assume that same.)
, as a reminder that we are not restricted to problems involving Earth. However,
. (For problems in which this is not true, we need to include the kinetic energy of both
masses and use conservation of momentum to relate the velocities to each other. But the principle remains the
Escape velocity
Escape velocity is often defined to be the minimum initial velocity of an object that is required to escape the surface
of a planet (or any large body like a moon) and never return. As usual, we assume no energy lost to an atmosphere,
should there be any.
Consider the case where an object is launched from the surface of a planet with an initial velocity directed away
from the planet. With the minimum velocity needed to escape, the object would justcome to rest infinitely far away,
that is, the object gives up the last of its kinetic energy just as it reaches infinity, where the force of gravity becomes
zero. Since ∞, this means the total energy is zero. Thus, we find the escape velocity from the surface
of an astronomical body of mass Mand radius Rby setting the total energy equal to zero. At the surface of the body,
the object is located at and it has escape velocity . It reaches ∞ with velocity .
Substituting into Equation 13.5, we have
∞
Solving for the escape velocity,
13.6
Notice that m has canceled out of the equation. The escape velocity is the same for all objects, regardless of mass.
Also, we are not restricted to the surface of the planet; Rcan be any starting point beyond the surface of the planet.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.3 • Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy 613
EXAMPLE 13.7
Escape from Earth
What is the escape speed from the surface of Earth? Assume there is no energy loss from air resistance. Compare
this to the escape speed from the Sun, starting from Earth’s orbit.
Strategy
We use Equation 13.6, clearly defining the values of Rand M . To escape Earth, we need the mass and radius of
Earth. For escaping the Sun, we need the mass of the Sun, and the orbital distance between Earth and the Sun.
Solution
Substituting the values for Earth’s mass and radius directly into Equation 13.6, we obtain
That is about 11 km/s or 25,000 mph. To escape the Sun, starting from Earth’s orbit, we use
and . The result is or about 42 km/s.
Significance
The speed needed to escape the Sun (leave the solar system) is nearly four times the escape speed from Earth’s
surface. But there is help in both cases. Earth is rotating, at a speed of nearly 460 m/s at the equator, and we can
use that velocity to help escape, or to achieve orbit. For this reason, many commercial space companies maintain
launch facilities near the equator. To escape the Sun, there is even more help. Earth revolves about the Sun at a
speed of approximately 30 km/s. By launching in the direction that Earth is moving, we need only an additional 12
km/s. The use of gravitational assist from other planets, essentially a gravity slingshot technique, allows space
probes to reach even greater speeds. In this slingshot technique, the vehicle approaches the planet and is
accelerated by the planet’s gravitational attraction. It has its greatest speed at the closest point of approach,
although it accelerates opposite to the motion in equal measure as it moves away. But relative to the planet, the
vehicle’s speed far before the approach, and long after, are the same. If the directions are chosen correctly, that can
result in a significant increase (or decrease if needed) in the vehicle’s speed relative to the rest of the solar system.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this website (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21escapevelocit) to learn more about escape velocity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.4
If we send a probe out of the solar system starting from Earth’s surface, do we only have to escape the Sun?
Energy and gravitationally bound objects
As stated previously, escape velocity can be defined as the initial velocity of an object that can escape the surface of
a moon or planet. More generally, it is the speed at an y position such that the t otalenergy is zero. If the total energy
is zero or greater, the object escapes. If the total energy is negative, the object cannot escape. Let’s see why that is
the case.
As noted earlier, we see that ∞. If the total energy is zero, then as m reaches a value of r that
approaches infinity, Ubecomes zero and so must the kinetic energy. Hence, m comes to rest infinitely far away from
M . It has “just escaped” M . If the total energy is positive, then kinetic energy remains at ∞ and certainly m does
not return. When the total energy is zero or greater, then we say that m is not gravitationally bound to M .
On the other hand, if the total energy is negative, then the kinetic energy must reach zero at some finite value of r,
614 13 • Gravitation
where Uis negative and equal to the total energy. The object can never exceed this finite distance from M , since to
do so would require the kinetic energy to become negative, which is not possible. We say m is gravitationally bound
to M .
We have simplified this discussion by assuming that the object was headed directly away from the planet. What is
remarkable is that the result applies for any velocity. Energy is a scalar quantity and hence Equation 13.5 is a scalar
equation—the direction of the velocity plays no role in conservation of energy. It is possible to have a gravitationally
bound system where the masses do not “fall together,” but maintain an orbital motion about each other.
We have one important final observation. Earlier we stated that if the total energy is zero or greater, the object
escapes. Strictly speaking, Equation 13.5 and Equation 13.6 apply for point objects. They apply to finite-sized,
spherically symmetric objects as well, provided that the value for r in Equation 13.5 is always greater than the sum
of the radii of the two objects. If r becomes less than this sum, then the objects collide. (Even for greater values of r,
but near the sum of the radii, gravitational tidal forces could create significant effects if both objects are planet
sized. We examine tidal effects in Tidal Forces.) Neither positive nor negative total energy precludes finite-sized
masses from colliding. For real objects, direction is important.
EXAMPLE 13.8
How Far Can an Object Escape?
Let’s consider the preceding example again, where we calculated the escape speed from Earth and the Sun, starting
from Earth’s orbit. We noted that Earth already has an orbital speed of 30 km/s. As we see in the next section, that is
the tangential speed needed to stay in circular orbit. If an object had this speed at the distance of Earth’s orbit, but
was headed directly away from the Sun, how far would it travel before coming to rest? Ignore the gravitational
effects of any other bodies.
Strategy
The object has initial kinetic and potential energies that we can calculate. When its speed reaches zero, it is at its
maximum distance from the Sun. We use Equation 13.5, conservation of energy, to find the distance at which kinetic
energy is zero.
Solution
The initial position of the object is Earth’s radius of orbit and the intial speed is given as 30 km/s. The final velocity is
zero, so we can solve for the distance at that point from the conservation of energy equation. Using
and , we have
where the mass m cancels. Solving for we get the Sun and takes us past Mars’s orbit, but not quite to the asteroid belt.
. Note that this is twice the initial distance from
Significance
The object in this case reached a distance exactl y twice the initial orbital distance. We will see the reason for this in
the next section when we calculate the speed for circular orbits.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.4 • Satellite Orbits and Energy 615
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.5
Assume you are in a spacecraft in orbit about the Sun at Earth’s orbit, but far away from Earth (so that it can be
ignored). How could you redirect your tangential velocity to the radial direction such that you could then pass by
Mars’s orbit? What would be required to change just the direction of the velocity?
13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the mechanism for circular orbits
• Find the orbital periods and speeds of satellites
• Determine whether objects are gravitationally bound
The Moon orbits Earth. In turn, Earth and the other planets orbit the Sun. The space directly above our atmosphere
is filled with artificial satellites in orbit. We examine the simplest of these orbits, the circular orbit, to understand the
relationship between the speed and period of planets and satellites in relation to their positions and the bodies that
they orbit.
Circular Orbits
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, Nicolaus Copernicus first suggested that Earth and all other planets orbit
the Sun in circles. He further noted that orbital periods increased with distance from the Sun. Later analysis by
Kepler showed that these orbits are actually ellipses, but the orbits of most planets in the solar system are nearly
circular. Earth’s orbital distance from the Sun varies a mere 2%. The exception is the eccentric orbit of Mercury,
whose orbital distance varies nearly 40%.
Determining the orbital speed and orbital period of a satellite is much easier for circular orbits, so we make that
assumption in the derivation that follows. As we described in the previous section, an object with negative total
energy is gravitationally bound and therefore is in orbit. Our computation for the special case of circular orbits will
confirm this. We focus on objects orbiting Earth, but our results can be generalized for other cases.
Consider a satellite of mass m in a circular orbit about Earth at distance r from the center of Earth (Figure 13.12). It
has centripetal acceleration directed toward the center of Earth. Earth’s gravity is the only force acting, so Newton’s
second law gives
616 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.12 A satellite of mass m orbiting at radius r from the center of Earth. The gravitational force supplies the centripetal
acceleration.
We solve for the speed of the orbit, noting that m cancels, to get the orbital speed
13.7
Consistent with what we saw in Equation 13.2 and Equation 13.6, m does not appear in Equation 13.7. The value of
g, the escape velocity, and orbital velocity depend only upon the distance from the center of the planet, and not
upon the mass of the object being acted upon. Notice the similarity in the equations for and . The escape
velocity is exactly times greater, about 40%, than the orbital velocity. This comparison was noted in Example
13.7, and it is true for a satellite at any radius.
To find the period of a circular orbit, we note that the satellite travels the circumference of the orbit period T . Using the definition of speed, we have to get
in one
. We substitute this into Equation 13.7 and rearrange
13.8
We see in the next section that this represents Kepler’s third law for the case of circular orbits. It also confirms
Copernicus’s observation that the period of a planet increases with increasing distance from the Sun. We need only
replace with in Equation 13.8.
We conclude this section by returning to our earlier discussion about astronauts in orbit appearing to be weightless,
as if they were free-falling towards Earth. In fact, they are in free fall. Consider the trajectories shown in Figure
13.13. (This figure is based on a drawing by Newton in his P rincipia and also appeared earlier in Motion in Two and
Three Dimensions.) All the trajectories shown that hit the surface of Earth have less than orbital velocity. The
astronauts would accelerate toward Earth along the noncircular paths shown and feel weightless. (Astronauts
actually train for life in orbit by riding in airplanes that free fall for 30 seconds at a time.) But with the correct orbital
velocity, Earth’s surface curves away from them at exactly the same rate as they fall toward Earth. Of course, staying
the same distance from the surface is the point of a circular orbit.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.4 • Satellite Orbits and Energy 617
FIGURE 13.13 A circular orbit is the result of choosing a tangential velocity such that Earth’s surface curves away at the same rate as the
object falls toward Earth.
We can summarize our discussion of orbiting satellites in the following Problem-Solving Strategy.
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Orbits and Conservation of Energy
1. Determine whether the equations for speed, energy, or period are valid for the problem at hand. If not, start
with the first principles we used to derive those equations.
2. To start from first principles, draw a free-body diagram and apply Newton’s law of gravitation and Newton’s
second law.
3. Along with the definitions for speed and energy, apply Newton’s second law of motion to the bodies of
interest.
EXAMPLE 13.9
The International Space Station
Determine the orbital speed and period for the International Space Station (ISS).
Strategy
Since the ISS orbits above Earth’s surface, the radius at which it orbits is use Equation 13.7 and Equation 13.8 to find the orbital speed and period, respectively.
. We
Solution
Using Equation 13.7, the orbital velocity is
which is about 17,000 mph. Using Equation 13.8, the period is
618 13 • Gravitation
which is just over 90 minutes.
Significance
The ISS is considered to be in low Earth orbit (LEO). Nearly all satellites are in LEO, including most weather
satellites. GPS satellites, at about 20,000 km, are considered medium Earth orbit. The higher the orbit, the more
energy is required to put it there and the more energy is needed to reach it for repairs. Of particular interest are the
satellites in geosynchronous orbit. All fixed satellite dishes on the ground pointing toward the sky, such as TV
reception dishes, are pointed toward geosynchronous satellites. These satellites are placed at the exact distance,
and just above the equator, such that their period of orbit is 1 day. They remain in a fixed position relative to Earth’s
surface.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.6
By what factor must the radius change to reduce the orbital velocity of a satellite by one-half? By what factor would
this change the period?
EXAMPLE 13.10
Determining the Mass of Earth
Determine the mass of Earth from the orbit of the Moon.
Strategy
We use Equation 13.8, solve for , and substitute for the period and radius of the orbit. The radius and period of
the Moon’s orbit was measured with reasonable accuracy thousands of years ago. From the astronomical data in
Appendix D, the period of the Moon is 27.3 days , and the averag e distance between the centers of
Earth and the Moon is 384,000 km.
Solution
Solving for ,
Significance
Compare this to the value of that we obtained in Example 13.5, using the value of g at the surface
of Earth. Although these values are very close (~0.8%), both calculations use average values. The value of g varies
from the equator to the poles by approximately 0.5%. But the Moon has an elliptical orbit in which the value of r
varies just over 10%. (The apparent size of the full Moon actually varies by about this amount, but it is difficult to
notice through casual observation as the time from one extreme to the other is many months.)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.7
There is another consideration to this last calculation of . We derived Equation 13.8 assuming that the satellite
orbits around the center of the astronomical body at the same radius used in the expression for the gravitational
force between them. What assumption is made to justify this? Earth is about 81 times more massive than the Moon.
Does the Moon orbit about the exact center of Earth?
Access for free at openstax.org
13.4 • Satellite Orbits and Energy 619
EXAMPLE 13.11
Galactic Speed and Period
Let’s revisit Example 13.2. Assume that the Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies are in a circular orbit about each
other. What would be the velocity of each and how long would their orbital period be? Assume the mass of each is
800 billion solar masses and their centers are separated by 2.5 million light years.
Strategy
We cannot use Equation 13.7 and Equation 13.8 directly because they were derived assuming that the object of
mass m orbited about the center of a much larger planet of mass M . We determined the gravitational force in
Example 13.2 using Newton’s law of universal gravitation. We can use Newton’s second law, applied to the
centripetal acceleration of either galaxy, to determine their tangential speed. From that result we can determine the
period of the orbit.
Solution
In Example 13.2, we found the force between the galaxies to be
and that the acceleration of each galaxy is
Since the galaxies are in a circular orbit, they have centripetal acceleration. If we ignore the effect of other galaxies,
then, as we learned in Linear Momentum and Collisions and Fixed-Axis Rotation, the centers of mass of the two
galaxies remain fixed. Hence, the galaxies must orbit about this common center of mass. For equal masses, the
center of mass is exactly half way between them. So the radius of the orbit, , is not the same as the distance
between the galaxies, but one-half that value, or 1.25 million light-years. These two different values are shown in
Figure 13.14.
FIGURE 13.14 The distance between two galaxies, which determines the gravitational force between them, is r, and is different from ,
which is the radius of orbit for each. For equal masses, . (credit: modification of work by Marc Van Norden)
Using the expression for centripetal acceleration, we have
620 13 • Gravitation
Solving for the orbit velocity, we have from , to find that the period is . Finally, we can determine the period of the orbit directly
, about 50 billion years.
Significance
The orbital speed of 47 km/s might seem high at first. But this speed is comparable to the escape speed from the
Sun, which we calculated in an earlier example. To give even more perspective, this period is nearly four times
longer than the time that the Universe has been in existence.
In fact, the present relative motion of these two galaxies is such that they are expected to collide in about 4 billion
years. Although the density of stars in each galaxy makes a direct collision of any two stars unlikely, such a collision
will have a dramatic effect on the shape of the galaxies. Examples of such collisions are well known in astronomy.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.8
Galaxies are not single objects. How does the gravitational force of one galaxy exerted on the “closer” stars of the
other galaxy compare to those farther away? What effect would this have on the shape of the galaxies themselves?
INTERACTIVE
See the Sloan Digital Sky Survey page (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21sloandigskysu) for more information on colliding
galaxies.
Engage the Phet simulation below to move the Sun, Earth, Moon, and space station to see the effects on their
gravitational forces and orbital paths. Visualize the sizes and distances between different heavenly bodies, and turn
off gravity to see what would happen without it.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/13-4-satellite-orbits-
and-energy)
Energy in Circular Orbits
In Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy, we argued that objects are gravitationally bound if their total
energy is negative. The argument was based on the simple case where the velocity was directly away or toward the
planet. We now examine the total energy for a circular orbit and show that indeed, the total energy is negative. As
we did earlier, we start with Newton’s second law applied to a circular orbit,
In the last step, we multiplied by r on each side. The right side is just twice the kinetic energy, so we have
The total energy is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies, so our final result is
13.9
We can see that the total energy is negative, with the same magnitude as the kinetic energy. For circular orbits, the
magnitude of the kinetic energy is exactly one-half the magnitude of the potential energy. Remarkably, this result
applies to any two masses in circular orbits about their common center of mass, at a distance r from each other. The
proof of this is left as an exercise. We will see in the next section that a very similar expression applies in the case of
elliptical orbits.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.4 • Satellite Orbits and Energy 621
EXAMPLE 13.12
Energy Required to Orbit
In Example 13.8, we calculated the energy required to simply lift the 9000-kg So yuz vehicle from Earth’s surface to
the height of the ISS, 400 km above the surface. In other words, we found its chang e in potential energy. We now
ask, what total energy change in the So yuz vehicle is required to take it from Earth’s surface and put it in orbit with
the ISS for a rendezvous (Figure 13.15)? How much of that total energy is kinetic energy?
FIGURE 13.15 The So yuz in a rendezvous with the ISS. Note that this diagram is not to scale; the So yuz is very small compared to the ISS
and its orbit is much closer to Earth. (credit: modification of works by NASA)
Strategy
The energy required is the difference in the So yuz’s total energy in orbit and that at Earth’s surface. We can use
Equation 13.9 to find the total energy of the So yuz at the ISS orbit. But the total energy at the surface is simply the
potential energy, since it starts from rest. [Note that we do notuse Equation 13.9 at the surface, since we are not in
orbit at the surface.] The kinetic energy can then be found from the difference in the total energy change and the
change in potential energy found in Example 13.8. Alternatively, we can use Equation 13.7 to find and
calculate the kinetic energy directly from that. The total energy required is then the kinetic energy plus the change in
potential energy found in Example 13.8.
Solution
From Equation 13.9, the total energy of the So yuz in the same orbit as the ISS is
The total energy at Earth’s surface is
622 13 • Gravitation
The change in energy is in potential energy from Example 13.6, . To get the kinetic energy, we subtract the change
. That gives us
. As stated earlier, the kinetic energy of a circular orbit is
always one-half the magnitude of the potential energy, and the same as the magnitude of the total energy. Our
result confirms this.
The second approach is to use Equation 13.7 to find the orbital speed of the So yuz, which we did for the ISS in
Example 13.9.
So the kinetic energy of the So yuz in orbit is
the same as in the previous method. The total energy is just
Significance
The kinetic energy of the So yuz is nearly eight times the change in its potential energy, or 90% of the total energy
needed for the rendezvous with the ISS. And it is important to remember that this energy represents only the energy
that must be given to the So yuz. With our present rocket technology, the mass of the propulsion system (the rocket
fuel, its container and combustion system) far exceeds that of the payload, and a tremendous amount of kinetic
energy must be given to that mass. So the actual cost in energy is many times that of the change in energy of the
payload itself.
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the conic sections and how they relate to orbital motion
• Describe how orbital velocity is related to conservation of angular momentum
• Determine the period of an elliptical orbit from its major axis
Using the precise data collected by Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler carefully analyzed the positions in the sky of all
the known planets and the Moon, plotting their positions at regular intervals of time. From this analysis, he
formulated three laws, which we address in this section.
Kepler’s First Law
The prevailing view during the time of Kepler was that all planetary orbits were circular. The data for Mars presented
the greatest challenge to this view and that eventually encouraged Kepler to give up the popular idea. Kepler’s first
law states that every planet moves along an ellipse, with the Sun located at a focus of the ellipse. An ellipse is
defined as the set of all points such that the sum of the distance from each point to two foci is a constant. Figure
13.16 shows an ellipse and describes a simple way to create it.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.5 • Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion 623
FIGURE 13.16 (a) An ellipse is a curve in which the sum of the distances from a point on the curve to two foci is a constant.
From this definition, you can see that an ellipse can be created in the following way. Place a pin at each focus, then place a loop of string
around a pencil and the pins. Keeping the string taught, move the pencil around in a complete circuit. If the two foci occupy the same place,
the result is a circle—a special case of an ellipse. (b) For an elliptical orbit, if , then m follows an elliptical path with Mat one focus.
More exactly, both m and Mmove in their own ellipse about the common center of mass.
For elliptical orbits, the point of closest approach of a planet to the Sun is called the perihelion. It is labeled point A
in Figure 13.16. The farthest point is the aphelion and is labeled point Bin the figure. For the Moon’s orbit about
Earth, those points are called the perigee and apogee, respectively.
An ellipse has several mathematical forms, but all are a specific case of the more general equation for conic
sections. There are four different conic sections, all given by the equation
13.10
The variables r and are shown in Figure 13.17 in the case of an ellipse. The constants and e are determined by
the total energy and angular momentum of the satellite at a given point. The constant e is called the eccentricity.
The values of and e determine which of the four conic sections represents the path of the satellite.
FIGURE 13.17 As before, the distance between the planet and the Sun is r, and the angle measured from the x-axis, which is along the
major axis of the ellipse, is .
One of the real triumphs of Newton’s law of universal gravitation, with the force proportional to the inverse of the
distance squared, is that when it is combined with his second law, the solution for the path of any satellite is a conic
section. Every path taken by m is one of the four conic sections: a circle or an ellipse for bound or closed orbits, or a
parabola or hyperbola for unbounded or open orbits. These conic sections are shown in Figure 13.18.
624 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.18 All motion caused by an inverse square force is one of the four conic sections and is determined by the energy and direction
of the moving body.
If the total energy is negative, then , and Equation 13.10 represents a bound or closed orbit of either an
ellipse or a circle, where . [You can see from Equation 13.10 that for , , and hence the radius is
constant.] For ellipses, the eccentricity is related to how oblong the ellipse appears. A circle has zero eccentricity,
whereas a very long, drawn-out ellipse has an eccentricity near one.
If the total energy is exactly zero, then and the path is a parabola. Recall that a satellite with zero total energy
has exactly the escape velocity. (The parabola is formed only by slicing the cone parallel to the tangent line along
the surface.) Finally, if the total energy is positive, then and the path is a hyperbola. These last two paths
represent unbounded orbits, where m passes by Monce and only once. This situation has been observed for several
comets that approach the Sun and then travel away, never to return.
We have confined ourselves to the case in which the smaller mass (planet) orbits a much larger, and hence
stationary, mass (Sun), but Equation 13.10 also applies to any two gravitationally interacting masses. Each mass
traces out the exact same-shaped conic section as the other. That shape is determined by the total energy and
angular momentum of the system, with the center of mass of the system located at the focus. The ratio of the
dimensions of the two paths is the inverse of the ratio of their masses.
INTERACTIVE
You can see an animation of two interacting objects at the My Solar Syst em page at Phet (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21mysolarsys). Choose the Sun and Planet preset option. You can also view the more complicated multiple body
problems as well. You may find the actual path of the Moon quite surprising, yet is obeying Newton’s simple laws of
motion.
Orbital Transfers
People have imagined traveling to the other planets of our solar system since they were discovered. But how can we
best do this? The most efficient method was discovered in 1925 by Walter Hohmann, inspired by a popular science
fiction novel of that time. The method is now called a Hohmann transfer. For the case of traveling between two
circular orbits, the transfer is along a “transfer” ellipse that perfectly intercepts those orbits at the aphelion and
perihelion of the ellipse. Figure 13.19 shows the case for a trip from Earth’s orbit to that of Mars. As before, the Sun
is at the focus of the ellipse.
For any ellipse, the semi-major axis is defined as one-half the sum of the perihelion and the aphelion. In Figure
13.17, the semi-major axis is the distance from the origin to either side of the ellipse along the x-axis, or just one-
half the longest axis (called the major axis). Hence, to travel from one circular orbit of radius to another circular
orbit of radius , the aphelion of the transfer ellipse will be equal to the value of the larger orbit, while the
perihelion will be the smaller orbit. The semi-major axis, denoted a, is therefore given by .
Access for free at openstax.org
13.5 • Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion 625
FIGURE 13.19 The transfer ellipse has its perihelion at Earth’s orbit and aphelion at Mars’ orbit.
Let’s take the case of traveling from Earth to Mars. For the moment, we ignore the planets and assume we are alone
in Earth’s orbit and wish to move to Mars’ orbit. From Equation 13.9, the expression for total energy, we can see that
the total energy for a spacecraft in the larger orbit (Mars) is greater (less negative) than that for the smaller orbit
(Earth). To move onto the transfer ellipse from Earth’s orbit, we will need to increase our kinetic energy, that is, we
need a velocity boost. The most efficient method is a very quick acceleration along the circular orbital path, which is
also along the path of the ellipse at that point. (In fact, the acceleration should be instantaneous, such that the
circular and elliptical orbits are congruent during the acceleration. In practice, the finite acceleration is short enough
that the difference is not a significant consideration.) Once you have arrived at Mars orbit, you will need another
velocity boost to move into that orbit, or you will stay on the elliptical orbit and simply fall back to perihelion where
you started. For the return trip, you simply reverse the process with a retro-boost at each transfer point.
To make the move onto the transfer ellipse and then off again, we need to know each circular orbit velocity and the
transfer orbit velocities at perihelion and aphelion. The velocity boost required is simply the difference between the
circular orbit velocity and the elliptical orbit velocity at each point. We can find the circular orbital velocities from
Equation 13.7. To determine the velocities for the ellipse, we state without proof (as it is beyond the scope of this
course) that total energy for an elliptical orbit is
where is the mass of the Sun and a is the semi-major axis. Remarkably, this is the same as Equation 13.9 for
circular orbits, but with the value of the semi-major axis replacing the orbital radius. Since we know the potential
energy from Equation 13.4, we can find the kinetic energy and hence the velocity needed for each point on the
ellipse. We leave it as a challenge problem to find those transfer velocities for an Earth-to-Mars trip.
We end this discussion by pointing out a few important details. First, we have not accounted for the gravitational
potential energy due to Earth and Mars, or the mechanics of landing on Mars. In practice, that must be part of the
calculations. Second, timing is everything. You do not want to arrive at the orbit of Mars to find out it isn’t there. We
must leave Earth at precisely the correct time such that Mars will be at the aphelion of our transfer ellipse just as we
arrive. That opportunity comes about every 2 years. And returning requires correct timing as well. The total trip
would take just under 3 years! There are other options that provide for a faster transit, including a gravity assist flyby
of Venus. But these other options come with an additional cost in energy and danger to the astronauts.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21plantripmars) for more details about planning a trip to Mars.
626 13 • Gravitation
Kepler’s Second Law
Kepler’s second law states that a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times, that is, the area divided by time,
called the areal velocity, is constant. Consider Figure 13.20. The time it takes a planet to move from position Ato B ,
sweeping out area , is exactly the time taken to move from position Cto D , sweeping area , and to move from
Eto F , sweeping out area . These areas are the same: .
FIGURE 13.20 The shaded regions shown have equal areas and represent the same time interval.
Comparing the areas in the figure and the distance traveled along the ellipse in each case, we can see that in order
for the areas to be equal, the planet must speed up as it gets closer to the Sun and slow down as it moves away. This
behavior is completely consistent with our conservation equation, Equation 13.5. But we will show that Kepler’s
second law is actually a consequence of the conservation of angular momentum, which holds for any system with
only radial forces.
Recall the definition of angular momentum from Angular Momentum, . For the case of orbiting motion,
is the angular momentum of the planet about the Sun, is the position vector of the planet measured from the Sun,
and ellipse, is the instantaneous linear momentum at any point in the orbit. Since the planet moves along the
is always tangent to the ellipse.
We can resolve the linear momentum into two components: a radial component along the line to the Sun, and a
component perpendicular to . The cross product for angular momentum can then be written as
.
The first term on the right is zero because is parallel to , and in the second term is perpendicular to , so
the magnitude of the cross product reduces to . Note that the angular momentum does not
depend upon . Since the gravitational force is only in the radial direction, it can change only and not ;
hence, the angular momentum must remain constant.
Now consider Figure 13.21. A small triangular area is swept out in time . The velocity is along the path and it
makes an angle with the radial direction. Hence, the perpendicular velocity is given by . The planet
moves a distance projected along the direction perpendicular to r. Since the area of a triangle is one-
half the base (r) times the height , for a small displacement, the area is given by . Substituting for
, multiplying by m in the numerator and denominator, and rearranging, we obtain
Access for free at openstax.org
13.5 • Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion 627
FIGURE 13.21 The element of area and is .
swept out in time as the planet moves through angle The areal velocity is simply the rate of change of area with time, so we have
. The angle between the radial direction
Since the angular momentum is constant, the areal velocity must also be constant. This is exactly Kepler’s second
law. As with Kepler’s first law, Newton showed it was a natural consequence of his law of gravitation.
INTERACTIVE
You can view an animated version (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21animationgrav) of Figure 13.20, and many other
interesting animations as well, at the School of Physics (University of New South Wales) site.
Kepler’s Third Law
Kepler’s third law states that the square of the period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of the orbit.
In Satellite Orbits and Energy, we derived Kepler’s third law for the special case of a circular orbit. Equation 13.8
gives us the period of a circular orbit of radius r about Earth:
For an ellipse, recall that the semi-major axis is one-half the sum of the perihelion and the aphelion. For a circular
orbit, the semi-major axis (a) is the same as the radius for the orbit. In fact, Equation 13.8 gives us Kepler’s third law
if we simply replace r with a and square both sides.
13.11
We have changed the mass of Earth to the more general M , since this equation applies to satellites orbiting any large
mass.
EXAMPLE 13.13
Orbit of Halley’s Comet
Determine the semi-major axis of the orbit of Halley’s comet, given that it arrives at perihelion every 75.3 years. If
the perihelion is 0.586 AU, what is the aphelion?
Strategy
We are given the period, so we can rearrange Equation 13.11, solving for the semi-major axis. Since we know the
value for the perihelion, we can use the definition of the semi-major axis, given earlier in this section, to find the
aphelion. We note that 1 Astronomical Unit (AU) is the average radius of Earth’s orbit and is defined to be
.
628 13 • Gravitation
Solution
have
Rearranging Equation 13.11 and inserting the values of the period of Halley’s comet and the mass of the Sun, we
This yields a value of or 17.8 AU for the semi-major axis.
The semi-major axis is one-half the sum of the aphelion and perihelion, so we have
Substituting for the values, we found for the semi-major axis and the value given for the perihelion, we find the value
of the aphelion to be 35.0 AU.
Significance
Edmond Halley, a contemporary of Newton, first suspected that three comets, reported in 1531, 1607, and 1682,
were actually the same comet. Before Tycho Brahe made measurements of comets, it was believed that they were
one-time events, perhaps disturbances in the atmosphere, and that they were not affected by the Sun. Halley used
Newton’s new mechanics to predict his namesake comet’s return in 1758.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.9
The nearly circular orbit of Saturn has an average radius of about 9.5 AU and has a period of 30 years, whereas
Uranus averages about 19 AU and has a period of 84 years. Is this consistent with our results for Halley’s comet?
13.6 Tidal Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the origins of Earth’s ocean tides
• Describe how neap and leap tides differ
• Describe how tidal forces affect binary systems
The origin of Earth’s ocean tides has been a subject of continuous investigation for over 2000 years. But the work of
Newton is considered to be the beginning of the true understanding of the phenomenon. Ocean tides are the result
of gravitational tidal forces. These same tidal forces are present in any astronomical body. They are responsible for
the internal heat that creates the volcanic activity on Io, one of Jupiter’s moons, and the breakup of stars that get
too close to black holes.
Lunar Tides
If you live on an ocean shore almost anywhere in the world, you can observe the rising and falling of the sea level
about twice per day. This is caused by a combination of Earth’s rotation about its axis and the gravitational attraction
of both the Moon and the Sun.
Let’s consider the effect of the Moon first. In Figure 13.22, we are looking “down” onto Earth’s North Pole. One side
of Earth is closer to the Moon than the other side, by a distance equal to Earth’s diameter. Hence, the gravitational
force is greater on the near side than on the far side. The magnitude at the center of Earth is between these values.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.6 • Tidal Forces 629
This is why a tidal bulge appears on both sides of Earth.
FIGURE 13.22 The tidal force stretches Earth along the line between Earth and the Moon. It is the diff erence between the gravitational
force from the far side to the near side, along with the orbit of Earth and the Moon around each other, that creates the tidal bulge on both
sides of the planet. Tidal variations of the oceans are on the order of few meters; hence, this diagram is greatly exaggerated.
The net force on Earth causes it to orbit about the Earth-Moon center of mass, located about 1600 km below Earth’s
surface along the line between Earth and the Moon. The tidal force can be viewed as the diff erence between the
force at the center of Earth and that at any other location. In Figure 13.23, this difference is shown at sea level,
where we observe the ocean tides. (Note that the change in sea level caused by these tidal forces is measured from
the baseline sea level. We saw earlier that Earth bulges many kilometers at the equator due to its rotation. This
defines the baseline sea level and here we consider only the much smaller tidal bulge measured from that baseline
sea level.)
FIGURE 13.23 The tidal force is the diff erence between the gravitational force at the center and that elsewhere. In this figure, the tidal
forces are shown at the ocean surface. These forces would diminish to zero as you approach Earth’s center.
Why does the rise and fall of the tides occur twice per day? Look again at Figure 13.22. If Earth were not rotating
and the Moon was fixed, then the bulges would remain in the same location on Earth. Relative to the Moon, the
bulges stay fixed—along the line connecting Earth and the Moon. But Earth rotates (in the direction shown by the
blue arrow) approximately every 24 hours. In 6 hours, the near and far locations of Earth move to where the low
tides are occurring, and 6 hours later, those locations are back to the high-tide position. Since the Moon also orbits
Earth approximately every 28 days, and in the same direction as Earth rotates, the time between high (and low)
tides is actually about 12.5 hours. The actual timing of the tides is complicated by numerous factors, the most
important of which is another astronomical body—the Sun.
The Effect of the Sun on Tides
In addition to the Moon’s tidal forces on Earth’s oceans, the Sun exerts a tidal force as well. The gravitational
attraction of the Sun on any object on Earth is nearly 200 times that of the Moon. However, as we show later in an
630 13 • Gravitation
example, the tidaleffect of the Sun is less than that of the Moon, but a significant effect nevertheless. Depending
upon the positions of the Moon and Sun relative to Earth, the net tidal effect can be amplified or attenuated.
Figure 13.22 illustrates the relative positions of the Sun and the Moon that create the largest tides, called spring
tides (or leap tides). During spring tides, Earth, the Moon, and the Sun are aligned and the tidal effects add. (Recall
that the tidal forces cause bulges on both sides.) Figure 13.22(c) shows the relative positions for the smallest tides,
called neap tides. The extremes of both high and low tides are affected. Spring tides occur during the new or full
moon, and neap tides occur at half-moon.
INTERACTIVE
You can see an animation (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21tidesinmot01) of the tides in motion.
FIGURE 13.24 (a and b) The spring tides occur when the Sun and the Moon are aligned, whereas (c) the neap tides occur when the Sun and
Moon make a right triangle with Earth. (Figure is not drawn to scale.)
The Magnitude of the Tides
With accurate data for the positions of the Moon and the Sun, the time of maximum and minimum tides at most
locations on our planet can be predicted accurately.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21tidepredic) to generate tide predictions for up to 2 years in the past or future,
Access for free at openstax.org
13.6 • Tidal Forces 631
at more than 3000 locations around the United States.
The magnitude of the tides, however, is far more complicated. The relative angles of Earth and the Moon determine
spring and neap tides, but the magnitudes of these tides are affected by the distances from Earth as well. Tidal
forces are greater when the distances are smaller. Both the Moon’s orbit about Earth and Earth’s orbit about the Sun
are elliptical, so a spring tide is exceptionally large if it occurs when the Moon is at perigee and Earth is at perihelion.
Conversely, it is relatively small if it occurs when the Moon is at apogee and Earth is at aphelion.
The greatest causes of tide variation are the topography of the local shoreline and the bathymetry (the profile of the
depth) of the ocean floor. The range of tides due to these effects is astounding. Although ocean tides are much
smaller than a meter in many places around the globe, the tides at the Bay of Fundy (Figure 13.25), on the east
coast of Canada, can be as much as 16.3 meters.
FIGURE 13.25 Boats in the Bay of Fundy at high and low tides. The twice-daily change in sea level creates a real challenge to the safe
mooring of boats. (credit: modification of works by Dylan Kereluk)
EXAMPLE 13.14
Comparing Tidal Forces
Compare the Moon’s gravitational force on a 1.0-kg mass located on the near side and another on the far side of
Earth. Repeat for the Sun and then compare the results to confirm that the Moon’s tidal forces are about twice that
of the Sun.
Strategy
We use Newton’s law of gravitation given by Equation 13.1. We need the masses of the Moon and the Sun and their
distances from Earth, as well as the radius of Earth. We use the astronomical data from Appendix D.
Solution
Substituting the mass of the Moon and mean distance from Earth to the Moon, we have
In the denominator, we use the minus sign for the near side and the plus sign for the far side. The results are
The Moon’s gravitational force is nearly 7% higher at the near side of Earth than at the far side, but both forces are
much less than that of Earth itself on the 1.0-kg mass. Nevertheless, this small difference creates the tides. We now
repeat the problem, but substitute the mass of the Sun and the mean distance between the Earth and Sun. The
results are
632 13 • Gravitation
We have to keep six significant digits since we wish to compare the difference between them to the difference for
the Moon. (Although we can’t justify the absolute value to this accuracy, since all values in the calculation are the
same except the distances, the accuracy in the difference is still valid to three digits.) The difference between the
near and far forces on a 1.0-kg mass due to the Moon is
whereas the difference for the Sun is
Note that a more proper approach is to write the difference in the two forces with the difference between the near
and far distances explicitly expressed. With just a bit of algebra we can show that
where and are the same to three significant digits, but their difference , equal to the diameter of
Earth, is also known to three significant digits. The results of the calculation are the same. This approach would be
necessary if the number of significant digits needed exceeds that available on your calculator or computer.
Significance
Note that the forces exerted by the Sun are nearly 200 times greater than the forces exerted by the Moon. But the
diff erence in those forces for the Sun is half that for the Moon. This is the nature of tidal forces. The Moon has a
greater tidal effect because the fractional change in distance from the near side to the far side is so much greater for
the Moon than it is for the Sun.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.10
Earth exerts a tidal force on the Moon. Is it greater than, the same as, or less than that of the Moon on Earth? Be
careful in your response, as tidal forces arise from the diff erence in gravitational forces between one side and the
other. Look at the calculations we performed for the tidal force on Earth and consider the values that would change
significantly for the Moon. The diameter of the Moon is one-fourth that of Earth. Tidal forces on the Moon are not
easy to detect, since there is no liquid on the surface.
Other Tidal Effects
Tidal forces exist between any two bodies. The effect stretches the bodies along the line between their centers.
Although the tidal effect on Earth’s seas is observable on a daily basis, long-term consequences cannot be observed
so easily. One consequence is the dissipation of rotational energy due to friction during flexure of the bodies
themselves. Earth’s rotation rate is slowing down as the tidal forces transfer rotational energy into heat. The other
effect, related to this dissipation and conservation of angular momentum, is called “locking” or tidal
synchronization. It has already happened to most moons in our solar system, including Earth’s Moon. The Moon
keeps one face toward Earth—its rotation rate has locked into the orbital rate about Earth. The same process is
happening to Earth, and eventually it will keep one face toward the Moon. If that does happen, we would no longer
see tides, as the tidal bulge would remain in the same place on Earth, and half the planet would never see the Moon.
However, this locking will take many billions of years, perhaps not before our Sun expires.
One of the more dramatic example of tidal effects is found on Io, one of Jupiter’s moons. In 1979, the V o y ag er
spacecraft sent back dramatic images of volcanic activity on Io. It is the only other astronomical body in our solar
system on which we have found such activity. Figure 13.26 shows a more recent picture of Io taken by the New
Horizons spacecraft on its way to Pluto, while using a gravity assist from Jupiter.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.6 • Tidal Forces 633
FIGURE 13.26 Dramatic evidence of tidal forces can be seen on Io. The eruption seen in blue is due to the internal heat created by the tidal
forces exerted on Io by Jupiter. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL/University of Arizona)
For some stars, the effect of tidal forces can be catastrophic. The tidal forces in very close binary systems can be
strong enough to rip matter from one star to the other, once the tidal forces exceed the cohesive self-gravitational
forces that hold the stars together. This effect can be seen in normal stars that orbit nearby compact stars, such as
neutron stars or black holes. Figure 13.27 shows an artist’s rendition of this process. As matter falls into the
compact star, it forms an accretion disc that becomes super-heated and radiates in the X-ray spectrum.
FIGURE 13.27 Tidal forces from a compact object can tear matter away from an orbiting star. In addition to the accretion disc orbiting the
compact object, material is often ejected along relativistic jets as shown. (credit: modification of work by ESO/L. Calçada/M. Kornmesser)
The energy output of these binary systems can exceed the typical output of thousands of stars. Another example
might be a quasar. Quasars are very distant and immensely bright objects, often exceeding the energy output of
entire galaxies. It is the general consensus among astronomers that they are, in fact, massive black holes producing
radiant energy as matter that has been tidally ripped from nearby stars falls into them.
634 13 • Gravitation
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how the theory of general relativity approaches gravitation
• Explain the principle of equivalence
• Calculate the Schwarzschild radius of an object
• Summarize the evidence for black holes
Newton’s law of universal gravitation accurately predicts much of what we see within our solar system. Indeed, only
Newton’s laws have been needed to accurately send every space vehicle on its journey. The paths of Earth-crossing
asteroids, and most other celestial objects, can be accurately determined solely with Newton’s laws. Nevertheless,
many phenomena have shown a discrepancy from what Newton’s laws predict, including the orbit of Mercury and
the effect that gravity has on light. In this section, we examine a different way of envisioning gravitation.
A Revolution in Perspective
In 1905, Albert Einstein published his theory of special relativity. This theory is discussed in great detail in Relativity
(http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/5-introduction), so we say only a few words here. In
this theory, no motion can exceed the speed of light—it is the speed limit of the Universe. This simple fact has been
verified in countless experiments. However, it has incredible consequences—space and time are no longer absolute.
Two people moving relative to one another do not agree on the length of objects or the passage of time. Almost all of
the mechanics you learned in previous chapters, while remarkably accurate even for speeds of many thousands of
miles per second, begin to fail when approaching the speed of light.
This speed limit on the Universe was also a challenge to the inherent assumption in Newton’s law of gravitation that
gravity is an action-at-a-distance force. That is, without physical contact, any change in the position of one mass is
instantly communicated to all other masses. This assumption does not come from any first principle, as Newton’s
theory simply does not address the question. (The same was believed of electromagnetic forces, as well. It is fair to
say that most scientists were not completely comfortable with the action-at-a-distance concept.)
A second assumption also appears in Newton’s law of gravitation Equation 13.1. The masses are assumed to be
exactly the same as those used in Newton’s second law, . We made that assumption in many of our
derivations in this chapter. Again, there is no underlying principle that this must be, but experimental results are
consistent with this assumption. In Einstein’s subsequent theory of general relativity (1916), both of these issues
were addressed. His theory was a theory of space-time geometry and how mass (and acceleration) distort and
interact with that space-time. It was not a theory of gravitational forces. The mathematics of the general theory is
beyond the scope of this text, but we can look at some underlying principles and their consequences.
The Principle of Equivalence
Einstein came to his general theory in part by wondering why someone who was free falling did not feel their weight.
Indeed, it is common to speak of astronauts orbiting Earth as being weightless, despite the fact that Earth’s gravity
is still quite strong there. In Einstein’s general theory, there is no difference between free fall and being weightless.
This is called the principle of equivalence. The equally surprising corollary to this is that there is no difference
between a uniform gravitational field and a uniform acceleration in the absence of gravity. Let’s focus on this last
statement. Although a perfectly uniform gravitational field is not feasible, we can approximate it very well.
Within a reasonably sized laboratory on Earth, the gravitational field is essentially uniform. The corollary states
that any physical experiments performed there have the identical results as those done in a laboratory accelerating
at in deep space, well away from all other masses. Figure 13.28 illustrates the concept.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity 635
FIGURE 13.28 According to the principle of equivalence, the results of all experiments performed in a laboratory in a uniform gravitational
field are identical to the results of the same experiments performed in a uniformly accelerating laboratory.
How can these two apparently fundamentally different situations be the same? The answer is that gravitation is not
a force between two objects but is the result of each object responding to the effect that the other has on the space-
time surrounding it. A uniform gravitational field and a uniform acceleration have exactly the same effect on space-
time.
A Geometric Theory of Gravity
Euclidian geometry assumes a “flat” space in which, among the most commonly known attributes, a straight line is
the shortest distance between two points, the sum of the angles of all triangles must be 180 degrees, and parallel
lines never intersect. Non-Euclidean geometry was not seriously investigated until the nineteenth century, so it is
not surprising that Euclidean space is inherently assumed in all of Newton’s laws.
The general theory of relativity challenges this long-held assumption. Only empty space is flat. The presence of
mass—or energy, since relativity does not distinguish between the two—distorts or curves space and time, or space-
time, around it. The motion of any other mass is simply a response to this curved space-time. Figure 13.29 is a two-
dimensional representation of a smaller mass orbiting in response to the distorted space created by the presence of
a larger mass. In a more precise but confusing picture, we would also see space distorted by the orbiting mass, and
both masses would be in motion in response to the total distortion of space. Note that the figure is a representation
to help visualize the concept. These are distortions in our three-dimensional space and time. We do not see them as
we would a dimple on a ball. We see the distortion only by careful measurements of the motion of objects and light
as they move through space.
636 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.29 A smaller mass orbiting in the distorted space-time of a larger mass. In fact, all mass or energy distorts space-time.
For weak gravitational fields, the results of general relativity do not differ significantly from Newton’s law of
gravitation. But for intense gravitational fields, the results diverge, and general relativity has been shown to predict
the correct results. Even in our Sun’s relatively weak gravitational field at the distance of Mercury’s orbit, we can
observe the effect. Starting in the mid-1800s, Mercury’s elliptical orbit has been carefully measured. However,
although it is elliptical, its motion is complicated by the fact that the perihelion position of the ellipse slowly
advances. Most of the advance is due to the gravitational pull of other planets, but a small portion of that
advancement could not be accounted for by Newton’s law. At one time, there was even a search for a “companion”
planet that would explain the discrepancy. But general relativity correctly predicts the measurements. Since then,
many measurements, such as the deflection of light of distant objects by the Sun, have verified that general
relativity correctly predicts the observations.
We close this discussion with one final comment. We have often referred to distortions of space-time or distortions
in both space and time. In both special and general relativity, the dimension of time has equal footing with each
spatial dimension (differing in its place in both theories only by an ultimately unimportant scaling factor). Near a
very large mass, not only is the nearby space “stretched out,” but time is dilated or “slowed.” We discuss these
effects more in the next section.
Black Holes
Einstein’s theory of gravitation is expressed in one deceptively simple-looking tensor equation (tensors are a
generalization of scalars and vectors), which expresses how a mass determines the curvature of space-time around
it. The solutions to that equation yield one of the most fascinating predictions: the black hole. The prediction is that
if an object is sufficiently dense, it will collapse in upon itself and be surrounded by an event horizon from which
nothing can escape. The name “black hole,” which was coined by astronomer John Wheeler in 1969, refers to the
fact that light cannot escape such an object. Karl Schwarzschild was the first person to note this phenomenon in
1916, but at that time, it was considered mostly to be a mathematical curiosity.
Surprisingly, the idea of a massive body from which light cannot escape dates back to the late 1700s.
Independently, John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace used Newton’s law of gravitation to show that light leaving
the surface of a star with enough mass could not escape. Their work was based on the fact that the speed of light
had been measured by Ole Rømer in 1676. He noted discrepancies in the data for the orbital period of the moon Io
Access for free at openstax.org
13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity 637
about Jupiter. Rømer realized that the difference arose from the relative positions of Earth and Jupiter at different
times and that he could find the speed of light from that difference. Michell and Laplace both realized that since light
had a finite speed, there could be a star massive enough that the escape speed from its surface could exceed that
speed. Hence, light always would fall back to the star. Oddly, observers far enough away from the very largest stars
would not be able to see them, yet they could see a smaller star from the same distance.
Recall that in Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy, we found that the escape speed, given by Equation
13.6, is independent of the mass of the object escaping. Even though the nature of light was not fully understood at
the time, the mass of light, if it had any, was not relevant. Hence, Equation 13.6 should be valid for light. Substituting
c, the speed of light, for the escape velocity, we have
Thus, we only need values for Rand Msuch that the escape velocity exceeds c, and then light will not be able to
escape. Michell posited that if a star had the density of our Sun and a radius that extended just beyond the orbit of
Mars, then light would not be able to escape from its surface. He also conjectured that we would still be able to
detect such a star from the gravitational effect it would have on objects around it. This was an insightful conclusion,
as this is precisely how we infer the existence of such objects today. While we have yet to, and may never, visit a
black hole, the circumstantial evidence for them has become so compelling that few astronomers doubt their
existence.
Before we examine some of that evidence, we turn our attention back to Schwarzschild’s solution to the tensor
equation from general relativity. In that solution arises a critical radius, now called the Schwarzschild radius.
For any mass M , if that mass were compressed to the extent that its radius becomes less than the Schwarzschild
radius, then the mass will collapse to a singularity, and anything that passes inside that radius cannot escape. Once
inside , the arrow of time takes all things to the singularity. (In a broad mathematical sense, a singularity is where
the value of a function goes to infinity. In this case, it is a point in space of zero volume with a finite mass. Hence, the
mass density and gravitational energy become infinite.) The Schwarzschild radius is given by
13.12
If you look at our escape velocity equation with , you will notice that it gives precisely this result. But that is
merely a fortuitous accident caused by several incorrect assumptions. One of these assumptions is the use of the
incorrectclassical expression for the kinetic energy for light. Just how dense does an object have to be in order to
turn into a black hole?
EXAMPLE 13.15
Calculating the Schwarzschild Radius
Calculate the Schwarzschild radius for both the Sun and Earth. Compare the density of the nucleus of an atom to the
density required to compress Earth’s mass uniformly to its Schwarzschild radius. The density of a nucleus is about
.
Strategy
We use Equation 13.12 for this calculation. We need only the masses of Earth and the Sun, which we obtain from the
astronomical data given in Appendix D.
Solution
Substituting the mass of the Sun, we have
638 13 • Gravitation
This is a diameter of only about 6 km. If we use the mass of Earth, we get of less than 2 cm! If we pack Earth’s mass into a sphere with the radius . This is a diameter
, we get a density of
Significance
A neutron star is the most compact object known—outside of a black hole itself. The neutron star is composed of
neutrons, with the density of an atomic nucleus, and, like many black holes, is believed to be the remnant of a
supernova—a star that explodes at the end of its lifetime. To create a black hole from Earth, we would have to
compress it to a density thirteen orders of magnitude greater than that of a neutron star. This process would require
unimaginable force. There is no known mechanism that could cause an Earth-sized object to become a black hole.
For the Sun, you should be able to show that it would have to be compressed to a density only about 80 times that
of a nucleus. (Note: Once the mass is compressed within its Schwarzschild radius, general relativity dictates that it
will collapse to a singularity. These calculations merely show the density we must achieve to initiate that collapse.)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 13.11
Consider the density required to make Earth a black hole compared to that required for the Sun. What conclusion
can you draw from this comparison about what would be required to create a black hole? Would you expect the
Universe to have many black holes with small mass?
The event horizon
The Schwarzschild radius is also called the event horizon of a black hole. We noted that both space and time are
stretched near massive objects, such as black holes. Figure 13.30 illustrates that effect on space. The distortion
caused by our Sun is actually quite small, and the diagram is exaggerated for clarity. Consider the neutron star,
described in Example 13.15. Although the distortion of space-time at the surface of a neutron star is very high, the
radius is still larger than its Schwarzschild radius. Objects could still escape from its surface.
However, if a neutron star gains additional mass, it would eventually collapse, shrinking beyond the Schwarzschild
radius. Once that happens, the entire mass would be pulled, inevitably, to a singularity. In the diagram, space is
stretched to infinity. Time is also stretched to infinity. As objects fall toward the event horizon, we see them
approaching ever more slowly, but never reaching the event horizon. As outside observers, we never see objects
pass through the event horizon—effectively, time is stretched to a stop.
INTERACTIVE
Visit this site (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21spacetelescop) to view an animated example of these spatial distortions.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity 639
FIGURE 13.30 The space distortion becomes more noticeable around increasingly larger masses. Once the mass density reaches a critical
level, a black hole forms and the fabric of space-time is torn. The curvature of space is greatest at the surface of each of the first three
objects shown and is finite. The curvature then decreases (not shown) to zero as you move to the center of the object. But the black hole is
different. The curvature becomes infinite: The surface has collapsed to a singularity, and the cone extends to infinity. (Note: These diagrams
are not to any scale.) (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Observational evidence of neutron stars and black holes
The first validated neutron star was discovered by Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967. Burnell observed a regular radio
pulse from an distant object, a phenomenon not previously observed. After further analysis and the discovery of a
second pulsar (as the objects would later be called), the researchers and scientific community recognized that the
pulses were caused by rapidly rotating neutron stars. At about the same time, a number of other astronomers,
including Iosof Shklovsky, observed radio sources that would be proven to be neutron stars. These discoveries
renewed interest in black holes. Evidence for black holes is based upon several types of observations, such as
radiation analysis of X-ray binaries, gravitational lensing of the light from distant galaxies, and the motion of visible
objects around invisible partners. We will focus on these later observations as they relate to what we have learned
in this chapter. Although light cannot escape from a black hole for us to see, we can nevertheless see the
gravitational effect of the black hole on surrounding masses.
The closest, and perhaps most dramatic, evidence for a black hole is at the center of our Milky Way galaxy. The
UCLA Galactic Group, using data obtained by the W. M. Keck telescopes, has determined the orbits of several stars
near the center of our galaxy. Some of that data is shown in Figure 13.31. The orbits of two stars are highlighted.
From measurements of the periods and sizes of their orbits, it is estimated that they are orbiting a mass of
approximately 4 million solar masses. Note that the mass must reside in the region created by the intersection of
the ellipses of the stars. The region in which that mass must reside would fit inside the orbit of Mercury—yet nothing
is seen there in the visible spectrum. In 2020, UCLA astrophysicist Andrea Ghez and Plank Institute's (Germany)
Reinhardt Genzel shared the Nobel prize for the discovery of the supermassive object. They shared the prize with
Richard Penrose, whose mathematical models proved that black holes can actually form and align with Einstein's
theory. Since their work, the world has actually seen a black hole, thanks to the Event Horizon Telescope. The global
network of observatories combined massive amounts of data in order to produce remarkable images of two black
holes: first at the center of galaxy Messier 87, and second at the center of the Milky Way, Saggitarious A.
640 13 • Gravitation
FIGURE 13.31 Paths of stars orbiting about a mass at the center of our Milky Way galaxy. From their motion, it is estimated that a black
hole of about 4 million solar masses resides at the center. (credit: modification of work by UCLA Galactic Center Group – W.M. Keck
Observatory Laser Team)
The physics of stellar creation and evolution is well established. The ultimate source of energy that makes stars
shine is the self-gravitational energy that triggers fusion. The general behavior is that the more massive a star, the
brighter it shines and the shorter it lives. The logical inference is that a mass that is 4 million times the mass of our
Sun, confined to a very small region, and that cannot be seen, has no viable interpretation other than a black hole.
Extragalactic observations strongly suggest that black holes are common at the center of galaxies.
INTERACTIVE
Visit the UCLA Galactic Center Group main page (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21galacenter01) for information on X-ray
binaries and gravitational lensing. Visit this page (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21galacenter02) to view the background
and the image of the black hole at the center of the Milky Way.
Dark matter
Stars orbiting near the very heart of our galaxy provide strong evidence for a black hole there, but the orbits of stars
far from the center suggest another intriguing phenomenon that is observed indirectly as well. Recall from
Gravitation Near Earth’s Surface that we can consider the mass for spherical objects to be located at a point at the
center for calculating their gravitational effects on other masses. Similarly, we can treat the total mass that lies
within the orbit of any star in our galaxy as being located at the center of the Milky Way disc. We can estimate that
mass from counting the visible stars and include in our estimate the mass of the black hole at the center as well.
But when we do that, we find the orbital speed of the stars is far too fast to be caused by that amount of matter.
Astronomer Vera Rubin disovered this phenomenon in the 1970s while researching the movement of spiral galaxies.
She observed that their outermost reaches were rotating as quickly as their centers, which was not the predicted
outcome. Figure 13.32 shows the orbital velocities of stars as a function of their distance from the center of the
Milky Way. The blue line represents the velocities we would expect from our estimates of the mass, whereas the
green curve is what we get from direct measurements. Rubin calculated that the rotational velocity of galaxies
should have been enough to cause them to fly apart, unless there was a significant discrepancy between their
observable matter and their actual matter. This became known as the galaxy rotation problem. Rubin proposed that
massive amounts of unseen matter must be present in and around the galaxies for the rotation speeds to occur.
Furthermore, the velocity profile does not follow what we expect from the observed distribution of visible stars. Not
only is the estimate of the total mass inconsistent with the data, but the expected distribution is inconsistent as
well. Rubin’s 1978 discovery provided much more concrete and widespread evidence of dark matter, a term Fritz
Zwicky coined in 1933 when he observed a similar anomaly while examining a galaxy cluster.
Access for free at openstax.org
13.7 • Einstein's Theory of Gravity FIGURE 13.32 The blue curve shows the expected orbital velocity of stars in the Milky Way based upon the visible stars we can see. The
green curve shows that the actually velocities are higher, suggesting additional matter that cannot be seen. (credit: modification of work by
Matthew Newby)
There are two prevailing ideas of what this matter could be—WIMPs and MACHOs. WIMPs stands for weakly
interacting massive particles. These particles (neutrinos are one example) interact very weakly with ordinary matter
and, hence, are very difficult to detect directly. MACHOs stands for massive compact halo objects, which are
composed of ordinary baryonic matter, such as neutrons and protons. There are unresolved issues with both of
these ideas, and far more research will be needed to solve the mystery.
641
642 13 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
action-at-a-distance force type of force exerted
without physical contact
aphelion farthest point from the Sun of an orbiting
body; the corresponding term for the Moon’s
farthest point from Earth is the apogee
apparent weight reading of the weight of an object
on a scale that does not account for acceleration
black hole mass that becomes so dense, that it
collapses in on itself, creating a singularity at the
center surround by an event horizon
escape velocity initial velocity an object needs to
escape the gravitational pull of another; it is more
accurately defined as the velocity of an object with
zero total mechanical energy
event horizon location of the Schwarzschild radius
and is the location near a black hole from within
which no object, even light, can escape
gravitational field vector field that surrounds the
mass creating the field; the field is represented by
field lines, in which the direction of the field is
tangent to the lines, and the magnitude (or field
strength) is inversely proportional to the spacing of
the lines; other masses respond to this field
gravitationally bound two object are gravitationally
bound if their orbits are closed; gravitationally
bound systems have a negative total mechanical
energy
Kepler’s first law law stating that every planet moves
along an ellipse, with the Sun located at a focus of
the ellipse
Kepler’s second law law stating that a planet sweeps
out equal areas in equal times, meaning it has a
constant areal velocity
Kepler’s third law law stating that the square of the
period is proportional to the cube of the semi-major
axis of the orbit
neap tide low tide created when the Moon and the
Sun form a right triangle with Earth
neutron star most compact object known—outside of
a black hole itself
Newton’s law of gravitation every mass attracts
every other mass with a force proportional to the
product of their masses, inversely proportional to
the square of the distance between them, and with
Key Equations
Newton’s law of gravitation
Acceleration due to gravity
at the surface of Earth
Access for free at openstax.org
direction along the line connecting the center of
mass of each
non-Euclidean geometry geometry of curved space,
describing the relationships among angles and lines
on the surface of a sphere, hyperboloid, etc.
orbital period time required for a satellite to
complete one orbit
orbital speed speed of a satellite in a circular orbit; it
can be also be used for the instantaneous speed for
noncircular orbits in which the speed is not constant
perihelion point of closest approach to the Sun of an
orbiting body; the corresponding term for the
Moon’s closest approach to Earth is the perigee
principle of equivalence part of the general theory of
relativity, it states that there no difference between
free fall and being weightless, or a uniform
gravitational field and uniform acceleration
Schwarzschild radius critical radius ( ) such that if
a mass were compressed to the extent that its
radius becomes less than the Schwarzschild radius,
then the mass will collapse to a singularity, and
anything that passes inside that radius cannot
escape
space-time concept of space-time is that time is
essentially another coordinate that is treated the
same way as any individual spatial coordinate; in
the equations that represent both special and
general relativity, time appears in the same context
as do the spatial coordinates
spring tide high tide created when the Moon, the Sun,
and Earth are along one line
theory of general relativity Einstein’s theory for
gravitation and accelerated reference frames; in this
theory, gravitation is the result of mass and energy
distorting the space-time around it; it is also often
referred to as Einstein’s theory of gravity
tidal force diff erence between the gravitational force
at the center of a body and that at any other location
on the body; the tidal force stretches the body
universal gravitational constant constant
representing the strength of the gravitational force,
that is believed to be the same throughout the
universe
Gravitational potential energy beyond Earth
Conservation of energy
Escape velocity
Orbital speed
Orbital period
Energy in circular orbit
Conic sections
Kepler’s third law
Schwarzschild radius
Summary
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation
• All masses attract one another with a
gravitational force proportional to their masses
and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between them.
• Spherically symmetrical masses can be treated
as if all their mass were located at the center.
• Nonsymmetrical objects can be treated as if their
mass were concentrated at their center of mass,
provided their distance from other masses is
large compared to their size.
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
• The weight of an object is the gravitational
attraction between Earth and the object.
• The gravitational field is represented as lines that
indicate the direction of the gravitational force;
the line spacing indicates the strength of the
field.
• Apparent weight differs from actual weight due
to the acceleration of the object.
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
• The acceleration due to gravity changes as we
move away from Earth, and the expression for
gravitational potential energy must reflect this
change.
• The total energy of a system is the sum of kinetic
and gravitational potential energy, and this total
energy is conserved in orbital motion.
• Objects must have a minimum velocity, the
escape velocity, to leave a planet and not return.
• Objects with total energy less than zero are
bound; those with zero or greater are
unbounded.
13 • Chapter Review 643
13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
• Orbital velocities are determined by the mass of
the body being orbited and the distance from the
center of that body, and not by the mass of a
much smaller orbiting object.
• The period of the orbit is likewise independent of
the orbiting object’s mass.
• Bodies of comparable masses orbit about their
common center of mass and their velocities and
periods should be determined from Newton’s
second law and law of gravitation.
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
• All orbital motion follows the path of a conic
section. Bound or closed orbits are either a circle
or an ellipse; unbounded or open orbits are
either a parabola or a hyperbola.
• The areal velocity of any orbit is constant, a
reflection of the conservation of angular
momentum.
• The square of the period of an elliptical orbit is
proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis
of that orbit.
13.6 Tidal Forces
• Earth’s tides are caused by the difference in
gravitational forces from the Moon and the Sun
on the different sides of Earth.
• Spring or neap (high) tides occur when Earth, the
Moon, and the Sun are aligned, and neap or (low)
tides occur when they form a right triangle.
• Tidal forces can create internal heating, changes
in orbital motion, and even destruction of orbiting
bodies.
644 13 • Chapter Review
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity
• According to the theory of general relativity,
gravity is the result of distortions in space-time
created by mass and energy.
• The principle of equivalence states that that both
mass and acceleration distort space-time and
are indistinguishable in comparable
Conceptual Questions
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation
1. 2. 3. Action at a distance, such as is the case for
gravity, was once thought to be illogical and
therefore untrue. What is the ultimate
determinant of the truth in science, and why was
this action at a distance ultimately accepted?
In the law of universal gravitation, Newton
assumed that the force was proportional to the
product of the two masses ( ). While all
scientific conjectures must be experimentally
verified, can you provide arguments as to why
this must be? (You may wish to consider simple
examples in which any other form would lead to
contradictory results.)
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
Must engineers take Earth’s rotation into
account when constructing very tall buildings at
any location other than the equator or very near
the poles?
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
It was stated that a satellite with negative total
energy is in a bound orbit, whereas one with zero
or positive total energy is in an unbounded orbit.
Why is this true? What choice for gravitational
potential energy was made such that this is
true?
It was shown that the energy required to lift a
satellite into a low Earth orbit (the change in
potential energy) is only a small fraction of the
kinetic energy needed to keep it in orbit. Is this
true for larger orbits? Is there a trend to the ratio
of kinetic energy to change in potential energy as
the size of the orbit increases?
13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
6. One student argues that a satellite in orbit is in
free fall because the satellite keeps falling
toward Earth. Another says a satellite in orbit is
not in free fall because the acceleration due to
gravity is not . With whom do you
4. 5. Access for free at openstax.org
circumstances.
• Black holes, the result of gravitational collapse,
are singularities with an event horizon that is
proportional to their mass.
• Evidence for the existence of black holes is still
circumstantial, but the amount of that evidence
is overwhelming.
agree with and why?
7. Many satellites are placed in geosynchronous
orbits. What is special about these orbits? For a
global communication network, how many of
these satellites would be needed?
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
8. Are Kepler’s laws purely descriptive, or do they
contain causal information?
9. In the diagram below for a satellite in an elliptical
orbit about a much larger mass, indicate where its
speed is the greatest and where it is the least. What
conservation law dictates this behavior? Indicate
the directions of the force, acceleration, and velocity
at these points. Draw vectors for these same three
quantities at the two points where the y-axis
intersects (along the semi-minor axis) and from this
determine whether the speed is increasing
decreasing, or at a max/min.
13.6 Tidal Forces
10. As an object falls into a black hole, tidal forces
increase. Will these tidal forces always tear the
object apart as it approaches the Schwarzschild
radius? How does the mass of the black hole and
size of the object affect your answer?
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity
11. The principle of equivalence states that all
experiments done in a lab in a uniform
gravitational field cannot be distinguished from
those done in a lab that is not in a gravitational
field but is uniformly accelerating. For the latter
case, consider what happens to a laser beam at
some height shot perfectly horizontally to the
floor, across the accelerating lab. (View this from
a nonaccelerating frame outside the lab.)
Relative to the height of the laser, where will the
laser beam hit the far wall? What does this say
about the effect of a gravitational field on light?
Problems
13.1 Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation
13. 14. 15. 16. Evaluate the magnitude of gravitational force
between two 5-kg spherical steel balls
separated by a center-to-center distance of 15
cm.
Estimate the gravitational force between two
sumo wrestlers, with masses 220 kg and 240 kg,
when they are embraced and their centers are
1.2 m apart.
Astrology makes much of the position of the
planets at the moment of one’s birth. The only
known force a planet exerts on Earth is
gravitational. (a) Calculate the gravitational force
exerted on a 4.20-kg baby by a 100-kg father
0.200 m away at birth (he is assisting, so he is
close to the child). (b) Calculate the force on the
baby due to Jupiter if it is at its closest distance
to Earth, some away. How does
the force of Jupiter on the baby compare to the
force of the father on the baby? Other objects in
the room and the hospital building also exert
similar gravitational forces. (Of course, there
could be an unknown force acting, but scientists
first need to be convinced that there is even an
effect, much less that an unknown force causes
it.)
A mountain 10.0 km from a person exerts a
gravitational force on the person equal to 2.00%
of their weight. (a) Calculate the mass of the
mountain. (b) Compare the mountain’s mass
with that of Earth. (c) What is unreasonable
about these results? (d) Which premises are
unreasonable or inconsistent? (Note that
accurate gravitational measurements can easily
detect the effect of nearby mountains and
13 • Chapter Review 645
12. Does the fact that light has no mass make any
difference to the argument?
As a person approaches the Schwarzschild
radius of a black hole, outside observers see all
the processes of that person (their clocks, their
heart rate, etc.) slowing down, and coming to a
halt as they reach the Schwarzschild radius.
(The person falling into the black hole sees their
own processes unaffected.) But the speed of
light is the same everywhere for all observers.
What does this say about space as you approach
the black hole?
17. variations in local geology.)
The International Space Station has a mass of
approximately 370,000 kg. (a) What is the force on a
150-kg suited astronaut if she is 20 m from the
center of mass of the station? (b) How accurate do
you think your answer would be?
18. 19. FIGURE 13.33 (credit: ©ESA–David Ducros)
Asteroid Toutatis passed near Earth in 2006 at
four times the distance to our Moon. This was
the closest approach we will have until 2060. If
it has mass of , what force did it
exert on Earth at its closest approach?
(a) What was the acceleration of Earth caused by
asteroid Toutatis (see previous problem) at its
closest approach? (b) What was the acceleration
of Toutatis at this point?
13.2 Gravitation Near Earth's Surface
20. (a) Calculate Earth’s mass given the acceleration
due to gravity at the North Pole is measured to
be and the radius of the Earth at the
pole is 6356 km. (b) Compare this with the
NASA’s Earth Fact Sheet value of
646 13 • Chapter Review
21. 22. 23. 25. 26. .
(a) What is the acceleration due to gravity on the
surface of the Moon? (b) On the surface of Mars?
The mass of Mars is and its
radius is .
(a) Calculate the acceleration due to gravity on
the surface of the Sun. (b) By what factor would
your weight increase if you could stand on the
Sun? (Never mind that you cannot.)
The mass of a particle is 15 kg. (a) What is its
weight on Earth? (b) What is its weight on the
Moon? (c) What is its mass on the Moon? (d)
What is its weight in outer space far from any
celestial body? (e) What is its mass at this point?
24. On a planet whose radius is acceleration due to gravity is the mass of the planet?
, the
. What is
The mean diameter of the planet Saturn is
, and its mean mass density is
. Find the acceleration due to gravity
at Saturn’s surface.
The mean diameter of the planet Mercury is
, and the acceleration due to
gravity at its surface is . Estimate the
mass of this planet.
The acceleration due to gravity on the surface of
a planet is three times as large as it is on the
surface of Earth. The mass density of the planet
is known to be twice that of Earth. What is the
radius of this planet in terms of Earth’s radius?
A body on the surface of a planet with the same
radius as Earth’s weighs 10 times more than it
does on Earth. What is the mass of this planet in
terms of Earth’s mass?
13.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and Total Energy
Find the escape speed of a projectile from the
surface of Mars.
Find the escape speed of a projectile from the
surface of Jupiter.
What is the escape speed of a satellite located
at the Moon’s orbit about Earth? Assume the
Moon is not nearby.
(a) Evaluate the gravitational potential energy
between two 5.00-kg spherical steel balls
separated by a center-to-center distance of 15.0
cm. (b) Assuming that they are both initially at
27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. Access for free at openstax.org
34. 35. rest relative to each other in deep space, use
conservation of energy to find how fast will they
be traveling upon impact. Each sphere has a
radius of 5.10 cm.
33. An average-sized asteroid located
from Earth with mass is detected
headed directly toward Earth with speed of 2.0
km/s. What will its speed be just before it hits
our atmosphere? (You may ignore the size of the
asteroid.)
(a) What will be the kinetic energy of the
asteroid in the previous problem just before it
hits Earth? b) Compare this energy to the output
of the largest fission bomb, 2100 TJ. What
impact would this have on Earth?
(a) What is the change in energy of a 1000-kg
payload taken from rest at the surface of Earth
and placed at rest on the surface of the Moon?
(b) What would be the answer if the payload
were taken from the Moon’s surface to Earth? Is
this a reasonable calculation of the energy
needed to move a payload back and forth?
13.4 Satellite Orbits and Energy
36. If a planet with 1.5 times the mass of Earth was
traveling in Earth’s orbit, what would its period
be?
37. Two planets in circular orbits around a star have
speeds of v and 2v. (a) What is the ratio of the
orbital radii of the planets? (b) What is the ratio
of their periods?
Using the average distance of Earth from the
Sun, and the orbital period of Earth, (a) find the
centripetal acceleration of Earth in its motion
about the Sun. (b) Compare this value to that of
the centripetal acceleration at the equator due
to Earth’s rotation.
(a) What is the orbital radius of an Earth satellite
having a period of 1.00 h? (b) What is
unreasonable about this result?
Calculate the mass of the Sun based on data for
Earth’s orbit and compare the value obtained
with the Sun’s actual mass.
Find the mass of Jupiter based on the fact that
Io, its innermost moon, has an average orbital
radius of 421,700 km and a period of 1.77 days.
Astronomical observations of light from the
Milky Way galaxy's stars indicate that it has a
mass of about solar masses. A star
38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 
43. 44. orbiting on the galaxy’s periphery is about
light-years from its center. (a) What
should the orbital period of that star be? (b) If its
period is years instead, what is the
mass of the galaxy? Such calculations are used
to imply the existence of mass that does not
emit any light. Scientists do not know what it is
comprised of, so this mass is known simply as
"dark matter" and remains an enduring
astronomical mystery.
(a) In order to keep a small satellite from drifting
into a nearby asteroid, it is placed in orbit with a
period of 3.02 hours and radius of 2.0 km. What
is the mass of the asteroid? (b) Does this mass
seem reasonable for the size of the orbit?
The Moon and Earth rotate about their common
center of mass, which is located about 4700 km
from the center of Earth. (This is 1690 km below
the surface.) (a) Calculate the acceleration due
to the Moon’s gravity at that point. (b) Calculate
the centripetal acceleration of the center of
Earth as it rotates about that point once each
lunar month (about 27.3 d) and compare it with
the acceleration found in part (a). Comment on
whether or not they are equal and why they
should or should not be.
The Sun orbits the Milky Way galaxy once each
, with a roughly circular orbit
averaging a radius of light-years. (A
light-year is the distance traveled by light in 1
year.) Calculate the centripetal acceleration of
the Sun in its galactic orbit. Does your result
support the contention that a nearly inertial
frame of reference can be located at the Sun? (b)
Calculate the average speed of the Sun in its
galactic orbit. Does the answer surprise you?
A geosynchronous Earth satellite is one that has
an orbital period of precisely 1 day. Such orbits
are useful for communication and weather
observation because the satellite remains above
the same point on Earth (provided it orbits in the
equatorial plane in the same direction as Earth’s
rotation). Calculate the radius of such an orbit
based on the data for Earth in Appendix D.
13.5 Kepler's Laws of Planetary Motion
47. Calculate the mass of the Sun based on data for
average Earth’s orbit and compare the value
obtained with the Sun’s commonly listed value
of .
45. 46. 13 • Chapter Review 647
48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. Io orbits Jupiter with an average radius of
421,700 km and a period of 1.769 days. Based
upon these data, what is the mass of Jupiter?
The “mean” orbital radius listed for astronomical
objects orbiting the Sun is typically not an
integrated average but is calculated such that it
gives the correct period when applied to the
equation for circular orbits. Given that, what is
the mean orbital radius in terms of aphelion and
perihelion?
The perihelion of Halley’s comet is 0.586 AU and
the aphelion is 17.8 AU. Given that its speed at
perihelion is 55 km/s, what is the speed at
aphelion ( )? (Hint: You
may use either conservation of energy or angular
momentum, but the latter is much easier.)
The perihelion of the comet Lagerkvist is 2.61
AU and it has a period of 7.36 years. Show that
the aphelion for this comet is 4.95 AU.
What is the ratio of the speed at perihelion to
that at aphelion for the comet Lagerkvist in the
previous problem?
Eros has an elliptical orbit about the Sun, with a
perihelion distance of 1.13 AU and aphelion
distance of 1.78 AU. What is the period of its
orbit?
13.6 Tidal Forces
54. 55. 56. (a) What is the difference between the forces on
a 1.0-kg mass on the near side of Io and far side
due to Jupiter? Io has a mean radius of 1821 km
and a mean orbital radius about Jupiter of
421,700 km. (b) Compare this difference to that
calculated for the difference for Earth due to the
Moon calculated in Example 13.14. Tidal forces
are the cause of Io’s volcanic activity.
If the Sun were to collapse into a black hole, the
point of no return for an investigator would be
approximately 3 km from the center singularity.
Would the investigator be able to survive visiting
even 300 km from the center? Answer this by
finding the difference in the gravitational
attraction the black holes exerts on a 1.0-kg
mass at the head and at the feet of the
investigator.
Consider Figure 13.23 in Tidal Forces. This
diagram represents the tidal forces for spring
tides. Sketch a similar diagram for neap tides.
(Hint: For simplicity, imagine that the Sun and
the Moon contribute equally. Your diagram
648 13 • Chapter Review
60. 61. would be the vector sum of two force fields (as
in Figure 13.23), reduced by a factor of two, and
superimposed at right angles.)
13.7 Einstein's Theory of Gravity
57. What is the Schwarzschild radius for the black
hole at the center of our galaxy if it has the mass
Additional Problems
59. A neutron star is a cold, collapsed star with
nuclear density. A particular neutron star has a
mass twice that of our Sun with a radius of 12.0
km. (a) What would be the weight of a 100-kg
astronaut on standing on its surface? (b) What
does this tell us about landing on a neutron star?
(a) How far from the center of Earth would the
net gravitational force of Earth and the Moon on
an object be zero? (b) Setting the magnitudes of
the forces equal should result in two answers
from the quadratic. Do you understand why
there are two positions, but only one where the
net force is zero?
How far from the center of the Sun would the net
gravitational force of Earth and the Sun on a
spaceship be zero?
Calculate the values of g at Earth’s surface for
the following changes in Earth’s properties: (a)
its mass is doubled and its radius is halved; (b)
its mass density is doubled and its radius is
unchanged; (c) its mass density is halved and its
mass is unchanged.
Suppose you can communicate with the
inhabitants of a planet in another solar system.
They tell you that on their planet, whose
diameter and mass are and
, respectively, the record for the
high jump is 2.0 m. Given that this record is
close to 2.4 m on Earth, what would you
conclude about your extraterrestrial friends’
jumping ability?
(a) Suppose that your measured weight at the
equator is one-half your measured weight at the
pole on a planet whose mass and diameter are
equal to those of Earth. What is the rotational
period of the planet? (b) Would you need to take
the shape of this planet into account?
A body of mass 100 kg is weighed at the North
Pole and at the equator with a spring scale. What
is the scale reading at these two points? Assume
that at the pole.
62. 63. 64. 65. Access for free at openstax.org
58. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 71. 72. of 4 million solar masses?
What would be the Schwarzschild radius, in light
years, if our Milky Way galaxy of 100 billion stars
collapsed into a black hole? Compare this to our
distance from the center, about 13,000 light
years.
Find the speed needed to escape from the solar
system starting from the surface of Earth.
Assume there are no other bodies involved and
do not account for the fact that Earth is moving
in its orbit. [Hint: Equation 13.6 does not apply.
Use Equation 13.5 and include the potential
energy of both Earth and the Sun.
Consider the previous problem and include the
fact that Earth has an orbital speed about the
Sun of 29.8 km/s. (a) What speed relative to
Earth would be needed and in what direction
should you leave Earth? (b) What will be the
shape of the trajectory?
A comet is observed 1.50 AU from the Sun with
a speed of 24.3 km/s. Is this comet in a bound
or unbound orbit?
An asteroid has speed 15.5 km/s when it is
located 2.00 AU from the sun. At its closest
approach, it is 0.400 AU from the Sun. What is
its speed at that point?
Space debris left from old satellites and their
launchers is becoming a hazard to other
satellites. (a) Calculate the speed of a satellite in
an orbit 900 km above Earth’s surface. (b)
Suppose a loose rivet is in an orbit of the same
radius that intersects the satellite’s orbit at an
angle of . What is the velocity of the rivet
relative to the satellite just before striking it? (c)
If its mass is 0.500 g, and it comes to rest inside
the satellite, how much energy in joules is
generated by the collision? (Assume the
satellite’s velocity does not change appreciably,
because its mass is much greater than the
rivet’s.)
A satellite of mass 1000 kg is in circular orbit
about Earth. The radius of the orbit of the
satellite is equal to two times the radius of
Earth. (a) How far away is the satellite? (b) Find
the kinetic, potential, and total energies of the
satellite.
After Ceres was promoted to a dwarf planet, we
now recognize the largest known asteroid to be
Vesta, with a mass of and a
diameter ranging from 458 km to 578 km.
Assuming that Vesta is spherical with radius 520
km, find the approximate escape velocity from
its surface.
73. (a) Given the asteroid Vesta which has a
diameter of 520 km and mass of
, what would be the orbital
period for a space probe in a circular orbit of
10.0 km from its surface? (b) Why is this
calculation marginally useful at best?
74. What is the orbital velocity of our solar system
about the center of the Milky Way? Assume that
the mass within a sphere of radius equal to our
distance away from the center is about a 100
billion solar masses. Our distance from the
center is 27,000 light years.
75. (a) Using the information in the previous
problem, what velocity do you need to escape
the Milky Way galaxy from our present position?
(b) Would you need to accelerate a spaceship to
this speed relative to Earth?
76. Circular orbits in Equation 13.10 for conic
sections must have eccentricity zero. From this,
and using Newton’s second law applied to
centripetal acceleration, show that the value of
in Equation 13.10 is given by
where Lis the angular momentum of the orbiting
body. The value of is constant and given by this
expression regardless of the type of orbit.
Challenge Problems
81. A tunnel is dug through the center of a perfectly
spherical and airless planet of radius R . Using
the expression for g derived in Gravitation Near
Earth’s Surface for a uniform density, show that
a particle of mass m dropped in the tunnel will
execute simple harmonic motion. Deduce the
period of oscillation of m and show that it has
the same period as an orbit at the surface.
82. Following the technique used in Gravitation Near
Earth’s Surface, find the value of g as a function
of the radius r from the center of a spherical
shell planet of constant density with inner and
outer radii and . Find g for both
and for . Assuming the
inside of the shell is kept airless, describe travel
inside the spherical shell planet.
77. 78. 79. 80. 83. 84. 13 • Chapter Review 649
Show that for eccentricity equal to one in
Equation 13.10 for conic sections, the path is a
parabola. Do this by substituting Cartesian
coordinates, x and y, for the polar coordinates, r
and , and showing that it has the general form
for a parabola, .
Using the technique shown in Satellite Orbits
and Energy, show that two masses and in
circular orbits about their common center of
mass, will have total energy
We have shown the kinetic energy of both
masses explicitly. (Hint: The masses orbit at radii
and , respectively, where . Be
sure not to confuse the radius needed for
centripetal acceleration with that for the
gravitational force.)
Given the perihelion distance, p, and aphelion
distance, q, for an elliptical orbit, show that the
velocity at perihelion, , is given by
. (Hint: Use conservation of
angular momentum to relate and , and
then substitute into the conservation of energy
equation.)
Comet P/1999 R1 has a perihelion of 0.0570 AU
and aphelion of 4.99 AU. Using the results of the
previous problem, find its speed at aphelion.
(Hint: The expression is for the perihelion. Use
symmetry to rewrite the expression for
aphelion.)
.
Show that the areal velocity for a circular orbit of
radius r about a mass Mis .
Does your expression give the correct value for
Earth’s areal velocity about the Sun?
Show that the period of orbit for two masses,
and , in circular orbits of radii and ,
respectively, about their common center-of-
mass, is given by
. (Hint:
The masses orbit at radii and , respectively
where . Use the expression for the
center-of-mass to relate the two radii and note
that the two masses must have equal but
opposite momenta. Start with the relationship of
the period to the circumference and speed of
650 13 • Chapter Review
85. 86. 87. orbit for one of the masses. Use the result of the
previous problem using momenta in the
expressions for the kinetic energy.)
Show that for small changes in height h , such
that , Equation 13.4 reduces to the
expression .
Using Figure 13.9, carefully sketch a free body
diagram for the case of a simple pendulum
hanging at latitude lambda, labeling all forces
acting on the point mass, m. Set up the
equations of motion for equilibrium, setting one
coordinate in the direction of the centripetal
acceleration (toward Pin the diagram), the other
perpendicular to that. Show that the deflection
angle , defined as the angle between the
pendulum string and the radial direction toward
the center of Earth, is given by the expression
below. What is the deflection angle at latitude
45 degrees? Assume that Earth is a perfect
sphere. , where is
the angular velocity of Earth.
(a) Show that tidal force on a small object of
mass m, defined as the diff erence in the
gravitational force that would be exerted on m at
Access for free at openstax.org
88. a distance at the near and the far side of the
object, due to the gravitation at a distance R
from M , is given by where
is the distance between the near and far side
and . (b) Assume you are falling feet
first into the black hole at the center of our
galaxy. It has mass of 4 million solar masses.
What would be the difference between the force
at your head and your feet at the Schwarzschild
radius (event horizon)? Assume your feet and
head each have mass 5.0 kg and are 2.0 m
apart. Would you survive passing through the
event horizon?
Find the Hohmann transfer velocities,
and , needed for a
trip to Mars. Use Equation 13.7 to find the
circular orbital velocities for Earth and Mars.
Using Equation 13.4 and the total energy of the
ellipse (with semi-major axis a), given by
, find the velocities at Earth
(perihelion) and at Mars (aphelion) required to
be on the transfer ellipse. The difference, , at
each point is the velocity boost or transfer
velocity needed.
CHAPTER 14
Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.1 This pressure map (left) and satellite photo (right) were used to model the path and impact of Hurricane Arthur as it
traveled up the East Coast of the United States in July 2014. Computer models use force and energy equations to predict developing
weather patterns. Scientists numerically integrate these time-dependent equations, along with the energy budgets of long- and short-
wave solar energy, to model changes in the atmosphere. The pressure map on the left was created using the Weather Research and
Forecasting Model designed at the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The colors represent the height of the 850-mbar pressure
surface. (credit left: modification of work by The National Center for Atmospheric Research; credit right: modification of work by NRL
Monterey Marine Meteorology Division, The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure
14.2 Measuring Pressure
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
INTRODUCTION
Picture yourself walking along a beach on the eastern shore of the United States. The air smells of
sea salt and the sun warms your body. Suddenly, an alert appears on your cell phone. A tropical depression has
formed into a hurricane. Atmospheric pressure has fallen to nearly 15% below average. As a result, forecasters
expect torrential rainfall, winds in excess of 100 mph, and millions of dollars in damage. As you prepare to evacuate,
you wonder: How can such a small drop in pressure lead to such a severe change in the weather?
Pressure is a physical phenomenon that is responsible for much more than just the weather. Changes in pressure
cause ears to “pop” during takeoff in an airplane. Changes in pressure can also cause scuba divers to suffer a
sometimes fatal disorder known as the “bends,” which occurs when nitrogen dissolved in the water of the body at
652 14 • Fluid Mechanics
extreme depths returns to a gaseous state in the body as the diver surfaces. Pressure lies at the heart of the
phenomena called buoyancy, which causes hot air balloons to rise and ships to float. Before we can fully understand
the role that pressure plays in these phenomena, we need to discuss the states of matter and the concept of
density.
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the different phases of matter
• Describe the characteristics of the phases of matter at the molecular or atomic level
• Distinguish between compressible and incompressible materials
• Define density and its related SI units
• Compare and contrast the densities of various substances
• Define pressure and its related SI units
• Explain the relationship between pressure and force
• Calculate force given pressure and area
Matter most commonly exists as a solid, liquid, or gas; these states are known as the three common phases of
matter. We will look at each of these phases in detail in this section.
Characteristics of Solids
Solids are rigid and have specific shapes and definite volumes. The atoms or molecules in a solid are in close
proximity to each other, and there is a significant force between these molecules. Solids will take a form determined
by the nature of these forces between the molecules. Although true solids are not incompressible, it nevertheless
requires a large force to change the shape of a solid. In some cases, the force between molecules can cause the
molecules to organize into a lattice as shown in Figure 14.2. The structure of this three-dimensional lattice is
represented as molecules connected by rigid bonds (modeled as stiff springs), which allow limited freedom for
movement. Even a large force produces only small displacements in the atoms or molecules of the lattice, and the
solid maintains its shape. Solids also resist shearing forces. (Shearing forces are forces applied tangentially to a
surface, as described in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity.)
Characteristics of Fluids
Liquids and gases are considered to be fluids because they yield to shearing forces, whereas solids resist them. Like
solids, the molecules in a liquid are bonded to neighboring molecules, but possess many fewer of these bonds. The
molecules in a liquid are not locked in place and can move with respect to each other. The distance between
molecules is similar to the distances in a solid, and so liquids have definite volumes, but the shape of a liquid
changes, depending on the shape of its container. Gases are not bonded to neighboring atoms and can have large
separations between molecules. Gases have neither specific shapes nor definite volumes, since their molecules
move to fill the container in which they are held (Figure 14.2).
Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 653
FIGURE 14.2 (a) Atoms in a solid are always in close contact with neighboring atoms, held in place by forces represented here by springs.
(b) Atoms in a liquid are also in close contact but can slide over one another. Forces between the atoms strongly resist attempts to
compress the atoms. (c) Atoms in a gas move about freely and are separated by large distances. A gas must be held in a closed container to
prevent it from expanding freely and escaping.
Liquids deform easily when stressed and do not spring back to their original shape once a force is removed. This
occurs because the atoms or molecules in a liquid are free to slide about and change neighbors. That is, liquids flow
(so they are a type of fluid), with the molecules held together by mutual attraction. When a liquid is placed in a
container with no lid, it remains in the container. Because the atoms are closely packed, liquids, like solids, resist
compression; an extremely large force is necessary to change the volume of a liquid.
In contrast, atoms in gases are separated by large distances, and the forces between atoms in a gas are therefore
very weak, except when the atoms collide with one another. This makes gases relatively easy to compress and
allows them to flow (which makes them fluids). When placed in an open container, gases, unlike liquids, will escape.
In this chapter, we generally refer to both gases and liquids simply as fluids, making a distinction between them only
when they behave differently. There exists one other phase of matter, plasma, which exists at very high
temperatures. At high temperatures, molecules may disassociate into atoms, and atoms disassociate into electrons
(with negative charges) and protons (with positive charges), forming a plasma. Plasma will not be discussed in depth
in this chapter because plasma has very different properties from the three other common phases of matter,
discussed in this chapter, due to the strong electrical forces between the charges.
Density
Suppose a block of brass and a block of wood have exactly the same mass. If both blocks are dropped in a tank of
water, why does the wood float and the brass sink (Figure 14.3)? This occurs because the brass has a greater
density than water, whereas the wood has a lower density than water.
654 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.3 (a) A block of brass and a block of wood both have the same weight and mass, but the block of wood has a much greater
volume. (b) When placed in a fish tank filled with water, the cube of brass sinks and the block of wood floats. (The block of wood is the same
in both pictures; it was turned on its side to fit on the scale.) (credit: modification of works by Joseph J. Trout, Stockton University)
Density is an important characteristic of substances. It is crucial, for example, in determining whether an object
sinks or floats in a fluid.
DENSITY
The average density of a substance or object is defined as its mass per unit volume,
14.1
where the Greek letter (rho) is the symbol for density, m is the mass, and Vis the volume.
The SI unit of density is cubic centimeter, , where
. Table 14.1 lists some representative values. The cgs unit of density is the gram per
The metric system was originally devised so that water would have a density of , equivalent to .
Thus, the basic mass unit, the kilogram, was first devised to be the mass of 1000 mL of water, which has a volume of
.
Solids
( )
Liquids
( )
Gases
( 101.3 kPa)
Substance Substance Substance
Aluminum Benzene Air
Bone Blood Carbon dioxide
Brass Ethyl alcohol Carbon monoxide
Concrete Gasoline Helium
TABLE 14.1 Densities of Some Common Substances
Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 655
Solids
( )
Liquids
( )
Gases
( 101.3 kPa)
Copper Glycerin Hydrogen
Cork Mercury Methane
Earth’s crust Olive oil Nitrogen
Glass Nitrous oxide
Gold Oxygen
Granite
Iron
Lead
Oak
Pine
Platinum
Polystyrene
Tungsten
Uranium
TABLE 14.1 Densities of Some Common Substances
As you can see by examining Table 14.1, the density of an object may help identify its composition. The density of
gold, for example, is about 2.5 times the density of iron, which is about 2.5 times the density of aluminum. Density
also reveals something about the phase of the matter and its substructure. Notice that the densities of liquids and
solids are roughly comparable, consistent with the fact that their atoms are in close contact. The densities of gases
are much less than those of liquids and solids, because the atoms in gases are separated by large amounts of empty
space. The gases are displayed for a standard temperature of and a standard pressure of 101.3 kPa, and
there is a strong dependence of the densities on temperature and pressure. The densities of the solids and liquids
displayed are given for the standard temperature of and the densities of solids and liquids depend on the
temperature. The density of solids and liquids normally increase with decreasing temperature.
Table 14.2 shows the density of water in various phases and temperature. The density of water increases with
decreasing temperature, reaching a maximum at and then decreases as the temperature falls below .
This behavior of the density of water explains why ice forms at the top of a body of water.
Substance
Ice
Water
TABLE 14.2 Densities of Water
656 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Substance
Water
Water
Water
Steam
Sea water
TABLE 14.2 Densities of Water
The density of a substance is not necessarily constant throughout the volume of a substance. If the density is
constant throughout a substance, the substance is said to be a homogeneous substance. A solid iron bar is an
example of a homogeneous substance. The density is constant throughout, and the density of any sample of the
substance is the same as its average density. If the density of a substance were not constant, the substance is said
to be a heterogeneous substance. A chunk of Swiss cheese is an example of a heterogeneous material containing
both the solid cheese and gas-filled voids. The density at a specific location within a heterogeneous material is
called local density, and is given as a function of location, (Figure 14.4).
FIGURE 14.4 Density may vary throughout a heterogeneous mixture. Local density at a point is obtained from dividing mass by volume in a
small volume around a given point.
Local density can be obtained by a limiting process, based on the average density in a small volume around the point
in question, taking the limit where the size of the volume approaches zero,
14.2
where is the density, m is the mass, and Vis the volume.
Since gases are free to expand and contract, the densities of the gases vary considerably with temperature, whereas
the densities of liquids vary little with temperature. Therefore, the densities of liquids are often treated as constant,
with the density equal to the average density.
Density is a dimensional property; therefore, when comparing the densities of two substances, the units must be
taken into consideration. For this reason, a more convenient, dimensionless quantity called the specific gravity is
often used to compare densities. Specific gravity is defined as the ratio of the density of the material to the density
of water at and one atmosphere of pressure, which is :
Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 657
The comparison uses water because the density of water is , which was originally used to define the
kilogram. Specific gravity, being dimensionless, provides a ready comparison among materials without having to
worry about the unit of density. For instance, the density of aluminum is 2.7 in (2700 in ), but its
specific gravity is 2.7, regardless of the unit of density. Specific gravity is a particularly useful quantity with regard to
buoyancy, which we will discuss later in this chapter.
Pressure
You have no doubt heard the word ‘pressure’ used in relation to blood (high or low blood pressure) and in relation to
weather (high- and low-pressure weather systems). These are only two of many examples of pressure in fluids.
(Recall that we introduced the idea of pressure in Static Equilibrium and Elasticity, in the context of bulk stress and
strain.)
PRESSURE
Pressure (p) is defined as the normal force Fper unit area Aover which the force is applied, or
14.3
To define the pressure at a specific point, the pressure is defined as the force dFexerted by a fluid over an
infinitesimal element of area dAcontaining the point, resulting in .
A given force can have a significantly different effect, depending on the area over which the force is exerted. For
instance, a force applied to an area of has a pressure that is 100 times as great as the same force applied to
an area of That is why a sharp needle is able to poke through skin when a small force is exerted, but applying
the same force with a finger does not puncture the skin (Figure 14.5).
FIGURE 14.5 (a) A person being poked with a finger might be irritated, but the force has little lasting effect. (b) In contrast, the same force
applied to an area the size of the sharp end of a needle is enough to break the skin.
Note that although force is a vector, pressure is a scalar. Pressure is a scalar quantity because it is defined to be
proportional to the magnitude of the force acting perpendicular to the surface area. The SI unit for pressure is the
pascal(Pa), named after the French mathematician and physicist Blaise Pascal (1623–1662), where
Several other units are used for pressure, which we discuss later in the chapter.
Variation of pressure with depth in a fluid of constant density
Pressure is defined for all states of matter, but it is particularly important when discussing fluids. An important
characteristic of fluids is that there is no significant resistance to the component of a force applied parallel to the
658 14 • Fluid Mechanics
surface of a fluid. The molecules of the fluid simply flow to accommodate the horizontal force. A force applied
perpendicular to the surface compresses or expands the fluid. If you try to compress a fluid, you find that a reaction
force develops at each point inside the fluid in the outward direction, balancing the force applied on the molecules
at the boundary.
Consider a fluid of constant density as shown in Figure 14.6. The pressure at the bottom of the container is due to
the pressure of the atmosphere plus the pressure due to the weight of the fluid. The pressure due to the fluid is
equal to the weight of the fluid divided by the area. The weight of the fluid is equal to its mass times the acceleration
due to gravity.
FIGURE 14.6 The bottom of this container supports the entire weight of the fluid in it. The vertical sides cannot exert an upward force on
the fluid (since it cannot withstand a shearing force), so the bottom must support it all.
Since the density is constant, the weight can be calculated using the density:
The pressure at the bottom of the container is therefore equal to atmospheric pressure added to the weight of the
fluid divided by the area:
This equation is only good for pressure at a depth for a fluid of constant density.
PRESSURE AT A DEPTH FOR A FLUID OF CONSTANT DENSITY
The pressure at a depth in a fluid of constant density is equal to the pressure of the atmosphere plus the
pressure due to the weight of the fluid, or
14.4
Where p is the pressure at a particular depth, is the acceleration due to gravity, and his the depth.
is the pressure of the atmosphere, is the density of the fluid, g
FIGURE 14.7 The Three Gorges Dam, erected on the Yangtze River in central China in 2008, created a massive reservoir that displaced
Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 659
more than one million people. (credit: modification of work by “Le Grand Portage”/Flickr)
EXAMPLE 14.1
What Force Must a Dam Withstand?
Consider the pressure and force acting on the dam retaining a reservoir of water (Figure 14.7). Suppose the dam is
500-m wide and the water is 80.0-m deep at the dam, as illustrated below. (a) What is the average pressure on the
dam due to the water? (b) Calculate the force exerted against the dam.
The average pressure p due to the weight of the water is the pressure at the average depth hof 40.0 m, since
pressure increases linearly with depth. The force exerted on the dam by the water is the average pressure times the
area of contact,
solution
a. The average pressure due to the weight of a fluid is
14.5
Entering the density of water from Table 14.2 and taking hto be the average depth of 40.0 m, we obtain
b. We have already found the value for p. The area of the dam is
so that
Significance
Although this force seems large, it is small compared with the fact, it is only 0.0800% of the weight.
weight of the water in the reservoir. In
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.1
If the reservoir in Example 14.1 covered twice the area, but was kept to the same depth, would the dam need to be
redesigned?
Pressure in a static fluid in a uniform gravitational field
A static fluidis a fluid that is not in motion. At any point within a static fluid, the pressure on all sides must be
equal—otherwise, the fluid at that point would react to a net force and accelerate.
660 14 • Fluid Mechanics
The pressure at any point in a static fluid depends only on the depth at that point. As discussed, pressure in a fluid
near Earth varies with depth due to the weight of fluid above a particular level. In the above examples, we assumed
density to be constant and the average density of the fluid to be a good representation of the density. This is a
reasonable approximation for liquids like water, where large forces are required to compress the liquid or change
the volume. In a swimming pool, for example, the density is approximately constant, and the water at the bottom is
compressed very little by the weight of the water on top. Traveling up in the atmosphere is quite a different
situation, however. The density of the air begins to change significantly just a short distance above Earth’s surface.
To derive a formula for the variation of pressure with depth in a tank containing a fluid of density ρ on the surface of
Earth, we must start with the assumption that the density of the fluid is not constant. Fluid located at deeper levels
is subjected to more force than fluid nearer to the surface due to the weight of the fluid above it. Therefore, the
pressure calculated at a given depth is different than the pressure calculated using a constant density.
Imagine a thin element of fluid at a depth h , as shown in Figure 14.8. Let the element have a cross-sectional area A
and height . The forces acting upon the element are due to the pressures p(y) above and below it. The
weight of the element itself is also shown in the free-body diagram.
FIGURE 14.8 Forces on a mass element inside a fluid. The weight of the element itself is shown in the free-body diagram.
Since the element of fluid between y and is not accelerating, the forces are balanced. Using a Cartesian
y-axis oriented up, we find the following equation for the y-component:
14.6
Note that if the element had a non-zero y-component of acceleration, the right-hand side would not be zero but
would instead be the mass times the y-acceleration. The mass of the element can be written in terms of the density
of the fluid and the volume of the elements:
Putting this expression for into Equation 14.6 and then dividing both sides by , we find
14.7
Taking the limit of the infinitesimally thin element gives the variation of pressure in a fluid:
, we obtain the following differential equation, which
14.8
Access for free at openstax.org
14.1 • Fluids, Density, and Pressure 661
This equation tells us that the rate of change of pressure in a fluid is proportional to the density of the fluid. The
solution of this equation depends upon whether the density ρ is constant or changes with depth; that is, the function
ρ (y).
If the range of the depth being analyzed is not too great, we can assume the density to be constant. But if the range
of depth is large enough for the density to vary appreciably, such as in the case of the atmosphere, there is
significant change in density with depth. In that case, we cannot use the approximation of a constant density.
Pressure in a fluid with a constant density
Let’s use Equation 14.9 to work out a formula for the pressure at a depth hfrom the surface in a tank of a liquid such
as water, where the density of the liquid can be taken to be constant.
We need to integrate Equation 14.9 from y-coordinate of the depth:
where the pressure is atmospheric pressure to the
14.9
Hence, pressure at a depth of fluid on the surface of Earth is equal to the atmospheric pressure plus ρ ghif the
density of the fluid is constant over the height, as we found previously.
Note that the pressure in a fluid depends only on the depth from the surface and not on the shape of the container.
Thus, in a container where a fluid can freely move in various parts, the liquid stays at the same level in every part,
regardless of the shape, as shown in Figure 14.9.
FIGURE 14.9 If a fluid can flow freely between parts of a container, it rises to the same height in each part. In the container pictured, the
pressure at the bottom of each column is the same; if it were not the same, the fluid would flow until the pressures became equal.
Variation of atmospheric pressure with height
The change in atmospheric pressure with height is of particular interest. Assuming the temperature of air to be
constant, and that the ideal gas law of thermodynamics describes the atmosphere to a good approximation, we can
find the variation of atmospheric pressure with height, when the temperature is constant. (We discuss the ideal gas
law in a later chapter, but we assume you have some familiarity with it from high school and chemistry.) Let p(y) be
the atmospheric pressure at height y. The density at y, the temperature Tin the Kelvin scale (K), and the mass m
662 14 • Fluid Mechanics
of a molecule of air are related to the absolute pressure by the ideal gas law, in the form
14.10
where is Boltzmann’s constant, which has a value of .
You may have encountered the ideal gas law in the form , where n is the number of moles and Ris the
gas constant. Here, the same law has been written in a different form, using the density instead of volume V .
Therefore, if pressure p changes with height, so does the density Using density from the ideal gas law, the rate of
variation of pressure with height is given as
where constant quantities have been collected inside the parentheses. Replacing these constants with a single
symbol the equation looks much simpler:
This gives the solution
Thus, atmospheric pressure drops exponentially with height, since the y-axis is pointed up from the ground and y
has positive values in the atmosphere above sea level. The pressure drops by a factor of when the height is
which gives us a physical interpretation for : The constant is a length scale that characterizes how pressure
varies with height and is often referred to as the pressure scale height.
We can obtain an approximate value of temperature or 300 K, we find
by using the mass of a nitrogen molecule as a proxy for an air molecule. At
Therefore, for every 8800 meters, the air pressure drops by a factor 1/e, or approximately one-third of its value. This
gives us only a rough estimate of the actual situation, since we have assumed both a constant temperature and a
constant g over such great distances from Earth, neither of which is correct in reality.
Direction of pressure in a fluid
Fluid pressure has no direction, being a scalar quantity, whereas the forces due to pressure have well-defined
directions: They are always exerted perpendicular to any surface. The reason is that fluids cannot withstand or exert
shearing forces. Thus, in a static fluid enclosed in a tank, the force exerted on the walls of the tank is exerted
perpendicular to the inside surface. Likewise, pressure is exerted perpendicular to the surfaces of any object within
the fluid. Figure 14.10 illustrates the pressure exerted by air on the walls of a tire and by water on the body of a
swimmer.
Access for free at openstax.org
14.2 • Measuring Pressure 663
FIGURE 14.10 (a) Pressure inside this tire exerts forces perpendicular to all surfaces it contacts. The arrows represent directions and
magnitudes of the forces exerted at various points. (b) Pressure is exerted perpendicular to all sides of this swimmer, since the water would
flow into the space he occupies if he were not there. The arrows represent the directions and magnitudes of the forces exerted at various
points on the swimmer. Note that the forces are larger underneath, due to greater depth, giving a net upward or buoyant force. The net
vertical force on the swimmer is equal to the sum of the buoyant force and the weight of the swimmer.
14.2 Measuring Pressure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define gauge pressure and absolute pressure
• Explain various methods for measuring pressure
• Understand the working of open-tube barometers
• Describe in detail how manometers and barometers operate
In the preceding section, we derived a formula for calculating the variation in pressure for a fluid in hydrostatic
equilibrium. As it turns out, this is a very useful calculation. Measurements of pressure are important in daily life as
well as in science and engineering applications. In this section, we discuss different ways that pressure can be
reported and measured.
Gauge Pressure vs. Absolute Pressure
Suppose the pressure gauge on a full scuba tank reads 3000 psi, which is approximately 207 atmospheres. When
the valve is opened, air begins to escape because the pressure inside the tank is greater than the atmospheric
pressure outside the tank. Air continues to escape from the tank until the pressure inside the tank equals the
pressure of the atmosphere outside the tank. At this point, the pressure gauge on the tank reads zero, even though
the pressure inside the tank is actually 1 atmosphere—the same as the air pressure outside the tank.
Most pressure gauges, like the one on the scuba tank, are calibrated to read zero at atmospheric pressure. Pressure
readings from such gauges are called gauge pressure, which is the pressure relative to the atmospheric pressure.
When the pressure inside the tank is greater than atmospheric pressure, the gauge reports a positive value.
Some gauges are designed to measure negative pressure. For example, many physics experiments must take place
in a vacuum chamber, a rigid chamber from which some of the air is pumped out. The pressure inside the vacuum
chamber is less than atmospheric pressure, so the pressure gauge on the chamber reads a negative value.
Unlike gauge pressure, absolute pressure accounts for atmospheric pressure, which in effect adds to the pressure
in any fluid not enclosed in a rigid container.
ABSOLUTE PRESSURE
The absolute pressure, or total pressure, is the sum of gauge pressure and atmospheric pressure:
14.11
664 14 • Fluid Mechanics
where is absolute pressure, is gauge pressure, and is atmospheric pressure.
For example, if a tire gauge reads 34 psi, then the absolute pressure is 34 psi plus 14.7 psi ( (equivalent to 336 kPa).
in psi), or 48.7 psi
In most cases, the absolute pressure in fluids cannot be negative. Fluids push rather than pull, so the smallest
absolute pressure in a fluid is zero (a negative absolute pressure is a pull). Thus, the smallest possible gauge
pressure is (which makes zero). There is no theoretical limit to how large a gauge pressure can be.
Measuring Pressure
A host of devices are used for measuring pressure, ranging from tire gauges to blood pressure monitors. Many other
types of pressure gauges are commonly used to test the pressure of fluids, such as mechanical pressure gauges. We
will explore some of these in this section.
Any property that changes with pressure in a known way can be used to construct a pressure gauge. Some of the
most common types include strain gauges, which use the change in the shape of a material with pressure;
capacitance pressure gauges, which use the change in electric capacitance due to shape change with pressure;
piezoelectric pressure gauges, which generate a voltage difference across a piezoelectric material under a pressure
difference between the two sides; and ion gauges, which measure pressure by ionizing molecules in highly
evacuated chambers. Different pressure gauges are useful in different pressure ranges and under different physical
situations. Some examples are shown in Figure 14.11.
FIGURE 14.11 (a) Gauges are used to measure and monitor pressure in gas cylinders. Compressed gases are used in many industrial as
well as medical applications. (b) Tire pressure gauges come in many different models, but all are meant for the same purpose: to measure
the internal pressure of the tire. This enables the driver to keep the tires inflated at optimal pressure for load weight and driving conditions.
(c) An ionization gauge is a high-sensitivity device used to monitor the pressure of gases in an enclosed system. Neutral gas molecules are
ionized by the release of electrons, and the current is translated into a pressure reading. Ionization gauges are commonly used in industrial
applications that rely on vacuum systems.
Manometers
One of the most important classes of pressure gauges applies the property that pressure due to the weight of a fluid
of constant density is given by . The U-shaped tube shown in Figure 14.12 is an example of a manomet er; in
part (a), both sides of the tube are open to the atmosphere, allowing atmospheric pressure to push down on each
side equally so that its effects cancel.
A manometer with only one side open to the atmosphere is an ideal device for measuring gauge pressures. The
gauge pressure is and is found by measuring h . For example, suppose one side of the U-tube is connected
to some source of pressure such as the balloon in part (b) of the figure or the vacuum-packed peanut jar shown
in part (c). Pressure is transmitted undiminished to the manometer, and the fluid levels are no longer equal. In part
(b), is greater than atmospheric pressure, whereas in part (c), is less than atmospheric pressure. In both
cases, differs from atmospheric pressure by an amount where is the density of the fluid in the
manometer. In part (b), can support a column of fluid of height h , so it must exert a pressure greater than
atmospheric pressure (the gauge pressure is positive). In part (c), atmospheric pressure can support a column of
fluid of height h , so is less than atmospheric pressure by an amount (the gauge pressure is negative).
Access for free at openstax.org
14.2 • Measuring Pressure 665
FIGURE 14.12 An open-tube manometer has one side open to the atmosphere. (a) Fluid depth must be the same on both sides, or the
pressure each side exerts at the bottom will be unequal and liquid will flow from the deeper side. (b) A positive gauge pressure
transmitted to one side of the manometer can support a column of fluid of height h . (c) Similarly, atmospheric pressure is greater than a
negative gauge pressure by an amount . The jar’s rigidity prevents atmospheric pressure from being transmitted to the peanuts.
Barometers
Manometers typically use a U-shaped tube of a fluid (often mercury) to measure pressure. A baromet er (see Figure
14.13) is a device that typically uses a single column of mercury to measure atmospheric pressure. The barometer,
invented by the Italian mathematician and physicist Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) in 1643, is constructed from
a glass tube closed at one end and filled with mercury. The tube is then inverted and placed in a pool of mercury.
This device measures atmospheric pressure, rather than gauge pressure, because there is a nearly pure vacuum
above the mercury in the tube. The height of the mercury is such that . When atmospheric pressure
varies, the mercury rises or falls.
Weather forecasters closely monitor changes in atmospheric pressure (often reported as barometric pressure), as
rising mercury typically signals improving weather and falling mercury indicates deteriorating weather. The
barometer can also be used as an altimeter, since average atmospheric pressure varies with altitude. Mercury
barometers and manometers are so common that units of mm Hg are often quoted for atmospheric pressure and
blood pressures.
FIGURE 14.13 A mercury barometer measures atmospheric pressure. The pressure due to the mercury’s weight, pressure. The atmosphere is able to force mercury in the tube to a height hbecause the pressure above the mercury is zero.
, equals atmospheric
666 14 • Fluid Mechanics
EXAMPLE 14.2
Fluid Heights in an Open U-Tube
A U-tube with both ends open is filled with a liquid of density to a height hon both sides (Figure 14.14). A liquid
of density is poured into one side and Liquid 2 settles on top of Liquid 1. The heights on the two sides are
different. The height to the top of Liquid 2 from the interface is and the height to the top of Liquid 1 from the level
of the interface is . Derive a formula for the height difference.
FIGURE 14.14 Two liquids of different densities are shown in a U-tube.
Strategy
The pressure at points at the same height on the two sides of a U-tube must be the same as long as the two points
are in the same liquid. Therefore, we consider two points at the same level in the two arms of the tube: One point is
the interface on the side of the Liquid 2 and the other is a point in the arm with Liquid 1 that is at the same level as
the interface in the other arm. The pressure at each point is due to atmospheric pressure plus the weight of the
liquid above it.
Solution
Since the two points are in Liquid 1 and are at the same height, the pressure at the two points must be the same.
Therefore, we have
Hence,
This means that the difference in heights on the two sides of the U-tube is
The result makes sense if we set the same height.
which gives If the two sides have the same density, they have
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.2
Mercury is a hazardous substance. Why do you suppose mercury is typically used in barometers instead of a safer
Access for free at openstax.org
14.3 • Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics 667
fluid such as water?
Units of pressure
As stated earlier, the SI unit for pressure is the pascal (Pa), where
In addition to the pascal, many other units for pressure are in common use (Table 14.3). In meteorology,
atmospheric pressure is often described in the unit of millibars (mbar), where
The millibar is a convenient unit for meteorologists because the average atmospheric pressure at sea level on Earth
is . Using the equations derived when considering pressure at a depth in a
fluid, pressure can also be measured as millimeters or inches of mercury. The pressure at the bottom of a 760-mm
column of mercury at in a container where the top part is evacuated is equal to the atmospheric pressure.
Thus, 760 mm Hg is also used in place of 1 atmosphere of pressure. In vacuum physics labs, scientists often use
another unit called the torr, named after Torricelli, who, as we have just seen, invented the mercury manometer for
measuring pressure. One torr is equal to a pressure of 1 mm Hg.
Unit Definition
SI unit: the Pascal
English unit: pounds per square inch ( or psi)
Other units of pressure
TABLE 14.3 Summary of the Units of Pressure
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Pascal’s principle
• Describe applications of Pascal’s principle
• Derive relationships between forces in a hydraulic system
In 1653, the French philosopher and scientist Blaise Pascal published his T reatise on the E quilibrium of Liquids, in
which he discussed principles of static fluids. A static fluid is a fluid that is not in motion. When a fluid is not flowing,
we say that the fluid is in static equilibrium. If the fluid is water, we say it is in hydrostatic equilibrium. For a fluid in
static equilibrium, the net force on any part of the fluid must be zero; otherwise the fluid will start to flow.
Pascal’s observations—since proven experimentally—provide the foundation for hydraulics, one of the most
important developments in modern mechanical technology. Pascal observed that a change in pressure applied to an
enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid and to the walls of its container. Because of this, we
often know more about pressure than other physical quantities in fluids. Moreover, Pascal’s principle implies that
the total pressure in a fluid is the sum of the pressures from different sources. A good example is the fluid at a depth
668 14 • Fluid Mechanics
depends on the depth of the fluid and the pressure of the atmosphere.
Pascal’s Principle
Pascal’s principle (also known as Pascal’s law) states that when a change in pressure is applied to an enclosed
fluid, it is transmitted undiminished to all portions of the fluid and to the walls of its container. In an enclosed fluid,
since atoms of the fluid are free to move about, they transmit pressure to all parts of the fluid andto the walls of the
container. Any change in pressure is transmitted undiminished.
Note that this principle does not say that the pressure is the same at all points of a fluid—which is not true, since the
pressure in a fluid near Earth varies with height. Rather, this principle applies to the chang e in pressure. Suppose
you place some water in a cylindrical container of height Hand cross-sectional area Athat has a movable piston of
mass m (Figure 14.15). Adding weight Mg at the top of the piston increases the pressure at the top by Mg/A , since
the additional weight also acts over area Aof the lid:
FIGURE 14.15 Pressure in a fluid changes when the fluid is compressed. (a) The pressure at the top layer of the fluid is different from
pressure at the bottom layer. (b) The increase in pressure by adding weight to the piston is the same everywhere, for example,
.
According to Pascal’s principle, the pressure at all points in the water changes by the same amount, Mg/A . Thus, the
pressure at the bottom also increases by Mg/A . The pressure at the bottom of the container is equal to the sum of
the atmospheric pressure, the pressure due to the fluid, and the pressure supplied by the mass. The change in
pressure at the bottom of the container due to the mass is
Since the pressure changes are the same everywhere in the fluid, we no longer need subscripts to designate the
pressure change for top or bottom:
INTERACTIVE
Pascal’s Barrel is a great demonstration of Pascal’s principle. Watch a simulation (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21pascalbarrel) of Pascal’s 1646 experiment, in which he demonstrated the effects of changing pressure in a fluid.
Applications of Pascal’s Principle and Hydraulic Systems
Hydraulic systems are used to operate automotive brakes, hydraulic jacks, and numerous other mechanical systems
(Figure 14.16).
Access for free at openstax.org
14.3 • Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics 669
FIGURE 14.16 A typical hydraulic system with two fluid-filled cylinders, capped with pistons and connected by a tube called a hydraulic
line. A downward force This results in an upward force on the left piston creates a change in pressure that is transmitted undiminished to all parts of the enclosed fluid.
on the right piston that is larger than because the right piston has a larger surface area.
We can derive a relationship between the forces in this simple hydraulic system by applying Pascal’s principle. Note
first that the two pistons in the system are at the same height, so there is no difference in pressure due to a
difference in depth. The pressure due to acting on area is simply
According to Pascal’s principle, this pressure is transmitted undiminished throughout the fluid and to all walls of the
container. Thus, a pressure is felt at the other piston that is equal to . That is, However,
since we see that
14.12
This equation relates the ratios of force to area in any hydraulic system, provided that the pistons are at the same
vertical height and that friction in the system is negligible.
Hydraulic systems can increase or decrease the force applied to them. To make the force larger, the pressure is
applied to a larger area. For example, if a 100-N force is applied to the left cylinder in Figure 14.16 and the right
cylinder has an area five times greater, then the output force is 500 N. Hydraulic systems are analogous to simple
levers, but they have the advantage that pressure can be sent through tortuously curved lines to several places at
once.
The hydraulic jack is such a hydraulic system. A hydraulic jack is used to lift heavy loads, such as the ones used by
auto mechanics to raise an automobile. It consists of an incompressible fluid in a U-tube fitted with a movable
piston on each side. One side of the U-tube is narrower than the other. A small force applied over a small area can
balance a much larger force on the other side over a larger area (Figure 14.17).
670 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.17 (a) A hydraulic jack operates by applying forces to an incompressible fluid in a U-tube, using a movable piston
on each side of the tube. (b) Hydraulic jacks are commonly used by car mechanics to lift vehicles so that repairs and maintenance
can be performed. (credit b: modification of work by Jane Whitney)
From Pascal’s principle, it can be shown that the force needed to lift the car is less than the weight of the car:
where is the force applied to lift the car, sectional area of the larger piston, and is the cross-sectional area of the smaller piston, is the weight of the car.
is the cross
EXAMPLE 14.3
Calculating Force on Wheel Cylinders: Pascal Puts on the Brakes
Consider the automobile hydraulic system shown in Figure 14.18. Suppose a force of 100 N is applied to the brake
pedal, which acts on the pedal cylinder (acting as a “master” cylinder) through a lever. A force of 500 N is exerted on
the pedal cylinder. Pressure created in the pedal cylinder is transmitted to the four wheel cylinders. The pedal
cylinder has a diameter of 0.500 cm and each wheel cylinder has a diameter of 2.50 cm. Calculate the magnitude of
the force created at each of the wheel cylinders.
Access for free at openstax.org
14.3 • Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics 671
FIGURE 14.18 Hydraulic brakes use Pascal’s principle. The driver pushes the brake pedal, exerting a force that is increased by the simple
lever and again by the hydraulic system. Each of the identical wheel cylinders receives the same pressure and, therefore, creates the same
force output . The circular cross-sectional areas of the pedal and wheel cylinders are represented by and , respectively.
Strategy
We are given the force applied to the pedal cylinder. The cross-sectional areas and from their given diameters. Then we can use the following relationship to find the force :
can be calculated
Manipulate this algebraically to get Solution
Pascal’s principle applied to hydraulic systems is given by
on one side and substitute known values.
Significance
This value is the force exerted by each of the four wheel cylinders. Note that we can add as many wheel cylinders as
we wish. If each has a 2.50-cm diameter, each will exert A simple hydraulic system, as an example
of a simple machine, can increase force but cannot do more work than is done on it. Work is force times distance
moved, and the wheel cylinder moves through a smaller distance than the pedal cylinder. Furthermore, the more
wheels added, the smaller the distance each one moves. Many hydraulic systems—such as power brakes and those
in bulldozers—have a motorized pump that actually does most of the work in the system.
672 14 • Fluid Mechanics
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 14.3
Would a hydraulic press still operate properly if a gas is used instead of a liquid?
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define buoyant force
• State Archimedes’ principle
• Describe the relationship between density and Archimedes’ principle
When placed in a fluid, some objects float due to a buoyant force. Where does this buoyant force come from? Why is
it that some things float and others do not? Do objects that sink get any support at all from the fluid? Is your body
buoyed by the atmosphere, or are only helium balloons affected (Figure 14.19)?
FIGURE 14.19 (a) Even objects that sink, like this anchor, are partly supported by water when submerged. (b) Submarines have adjustable
density (ballast tanks) so that they may float or sink as desired. (c) Helium-filled balloons tug upward on their strings, demonstrating air’s
buoyant effect. (credit b: modification of work by Allied Navy; credit c: modification of work by “Crystl”/Flickr)
Answers to all these questions, and many others, are based on the fact that pressure increases with depth in a fluid.
This means that the upward force on the bottom of an object in a fluid is greater than the downward force on top of
the object. There is an upward force, or buoyant force, on any object in any fluid (Figure 14.20). If the buoyant force
is greater than the object’s weight, the net force on the object is upward. If we release such an object, it will rise in
the fluid. If the buoyant force is less than the object’s weight, the object sinks when released. If the buoyant force
equals the object’s weight, the object can remain suspended at its present depth, either immersed in the fluid (as
for a neutrally buoyant diver) or partly above the surface (as with a floating object.) If the buoyant force equals the
object’s weight, the object can remain suspended at its present depth. The buoyant force is always present, whether
the object floats, sinks, or is suspended in a fluid.
BUOYANT FORCE
The buoyant force is the upward force on any object in any fluid.
Access for free at openstax.org
14.4 • Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy 673
FIGURE 14.20 Pressure due to the weight of a fluid increases with depth because . This change in pressure and associated upward
force on the bottom of the cylinder are greater than the downward force on the top of the cylinder. The differences in the force results in the
buoyant force . (Horizontal forces cancel.)
Archimedes’ Principle
Just how large a force is buoyant force? To answer this question, think about what happens when a submerged
object is removed from a fluid, as in Figure 14.21. If the object were not in the fluid, the space the object occupied
would be filled by fluid having a weight This weight is supported by the surrounding fluid, so the buoyant force
must equal the weight of the fluid displaced by the object.
ARCHIMEDES’ PRINCIPLE
The buoyant force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it displaces. In equation form, Archimedes’
principle is
where is the buoyant force and is the weight of the fluid displaced by the object.
This principle is named after the Greek mathematician and inventor Archimedes (ca. 287–212 BCE), who stated this
principle long before concepts of force were well established.
FIGURE 14.21 (a) An object submerged in a fluid experiences a buoyant force If is greater than the weight of the object, the object
rises. If is less than the weight of the object, the object sinks. (b) If the object is removed, it is replaced by fluid having weight Since
this weight is supported by surrounding fluid, the buoyant force must equal the weight of the fluid displaced.
674 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Archimedes’ principle refers to the force of buoyancy that results when a body is submerged in a fluid, whether
partially or wholly. The force that provides the pressure of a fluid acts on a body perpendicular to the surface of the
body. In other words, the force due to the pressure at the bottom is pointed up, while at the top, the force due to the
pressure is pointed down; the forces due to the pressures at the sides are pointing into the body.
Since the bottom of the body is at a greater depth than the top of the body, the pressure at the lower part of the
body is higher than the pressure at the upper part, as shown in Figure 14.20. Therefore a net upward force acts on
the body. This upward force is the force of buoyancy, or simply buo y ancy.
INTERACTIVE
The exclamation “Eureka” (meaning “I found it”) has often been credited to Archimedes as he made the discovery
that would lead to Archimedes’ principle. Some say it all started in a bathtub. To hear this story, watch this video
(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21archNASA) or explore Scientific American (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21archsciamer) to learn
more.
Density and Archimedes’ Principle
If you drop a lump of clay in water, it will sink. But if you mold the same lump of clay into the shape of a boat, it will
float. Because of its shape, the clay boat displaces more water than the lump and experiences a greater buoyant
force, even though its mass is the same. The same is true of steel ships.
The average density of an object is what ultimately determines whether it floats. If an object’s average density is
less than that of the surrounding fluid, it will float. The reason is that the fluid, having a higher density, contains
more mass and hence more weight in the same volume. The buoyant force, which equals the weight of the fluid
displaced, is thus greater than the weight of the object. Likewise, an object denser than the fluid will sink.
The extent to which a floating object is submerged depends on how the object’s density compares to the density of
the fluid. In Figure 14.22, for example, the unloaded ship has a lower density and less of it is submerged compared
with the same ship when loaded. We can derive a quantitative expression for the fraction submerged by considering
density. The fraction submerged is the ratio of the volume submerged to the volume of the object, or
The volume submerged equals the volume of fluid displaced, which we call between the densities by substituting into the expression. This gives
. Now we can obtain the relationship
where is the average density of the object and that of the displaced fluid are equal, so they cancel from the equation, leaving
is the density of the fluid. Since the object floats, its mass and
We can use this relationship to measure densities.
Access for free at openstax.org
14.4 • Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy 675
FIGURE 14.22 An unloaded ship (a) floats higher in the water than a loaded ship (b).
EXAMPLE 14.4
Calculating Average Density
Suppose a 60.0-kg woman floats in fresh water with 97.0% of her volume submerged when her lungs are full of air.
What is her average density?
Strategy
We can find the woman’s density by solving the equation
for the density of the object. This yields
We know both the fraction submerged and the density of water, so we can calculate the woman’s density.
Solution
Entering the known values into the expression for her density, we obtain
Significance
The woman’s density is less than the fluid density. We expect this because she floats.
Numerous lower-density objects or substances float in higher-density fluids: oil on water, a hot-air balloon in the
atmosphere, a bit of cork in wine, an iceberg in salt water, and hot wax in a “lava lamp,” to name a few. A less
obvious example is mountain ranges floating on the higher-density crust and mantle beneath them. Even seemingly
solid Earth has fluid characteristics.
Measuring Density
One of the most common techniques for determining density is shown in Figure 14.23.
676 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.23 (a) A coin is weighed in air. (b) The apparent weight of the coin is determined while it is completely submerged in a fluid of
known density. These two measurements are used to calculate the density of the coin.
An object, here a coin, is weighed in air and then weighed again while submerged in a liquid. The density of the coin,
an indication of its authenticity, can be calculated if the fluid density is known. We can use this same technique to
determine the density of the fluid if the density of the coin is known.
All of these calculations are based on Archimedes’ principle, which states that the buoyant force on the object
equals the weight of the fluid displaced. This, in turn, means that the object appears to weigh less when submerged;
we call this measurement the object’s apparent weight. The object suffers an apparent weight loss equal to the
weight of the fluid displaced. Alternatively, on balances that measure mass, the object suffers an apparent mass
loss equal to the mass of fluid displaced. That is, apparent weight loss equals weight of fluid displaced, or apparent
mass loss equals mass of fluid displaced.
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the characteristics of flow
• Calculate flow rate
• Describe the relationship between flow rate and velocity
• Explain the consequences of the equation of continuity to the conservation of mass
The first part of this chapter dealt with fluid statics, the study of fluids at rest. The rest of this chapter deals with
fluid dynamics, the study of fluids in motion. Even the most basic forms of fluid motion can be quite complex. For
this reason, we limit our investigation to ideal fluids in many of the examples. An ideal fluid is a fluid with negligible
viscosity. Viscosity is a measure of the internal friction in a fluid; we examine it in more detail in Viscosity and
Turbulence. In a few examples, we examine an incompressible fluid—one for which an extremely large force is
required to change the volume—since the density in an incompressible fluid is constant throughout.
Characteristics of Flow
Velocity vectors are often used to illustrate fluid motion in applications like meteorology. For example, wind—the
fluid motion of air in the atmosphere—can be represented by vectors indicating the speed and direction of the wind
at any given point on a map. Figure 14.24 shows velocity vectors describing the winds during Hurricane Arthur in
2014.
Access for free at openstax.org
14.5 • Fluid Dynamics 677
FIGURE 14.24 The velocity vectors show the flow of wind in Hurricane Arthur. Notice the circulation of the wind around the eye of the
hurricane. Wind speeds are highest near the eye. The colors represent the relative vorticity, a measure of turning or spinning of the air.
(credit: modification of work by Joseph Trout, Stockton University)
Another method for representing fluid motion is a streamline. A streamline represents the path of a small volume of
fluid as it flows. The velocity is always tangential to the streamline. The diagrams in Figure 14.25 use streamlines to
illustrate two examples of fluids moving through a pipe. The first fluid exhibits a laminar flow (sometimes described
as a steady flow), represented by smooth, parallel streamlines. Note that in the example shown in part (a), the
velocity of the fluid is greatest in the center and decreases near the walls of the pipe due to the viscosity of the fluid
and friction between the pipe walls and the fluid. This is a special case of laminar flow, where the friction between
the pipe and the fluid is high, known as no slip boundary conditions. The second diagram represents turbulent flow,
in which streamlines are irregular and change over time. In turbulent flow, the paths of the fluid flow are irregular as
different parts of the fluid mix together or form small circular regions that resemble whirlpools. This can occur when
the speed of the fluid reaches a certain critical speed.
FIGURE 14.25 (a) Laminar flow can be thought of as layers of fluid moving in parallel, regular paths. (b) In turbulent flow, regions of fluid
move in irregular, colliding paths, resulting in mixing and swirling.
Flow Rate and its Relation to Velocity
The volume of fluid passing by a given location through an area during a period of time is called flow rate Q , or more
precisely, volume flow rate. In symbols, this is written as
14.13
678 14 • Fluid Mechanics
where Vis the volume and tis the elapsed time. In Figure 14.26, the volume of the cylinder is Ax, so the flow rate is
FIGURE 14.26 Flow rate is the volume of fluid flowing past a point through the area Aper unit time. Here, the shaded cylinder of fluid flows
past point Pin a uniform pipe in time t .
The SI unit for flow rate is but several other units for Qare in common use, such as liters per minute (L/min).
Note that a liter (L) is 1/1000 of a cubic meter or 1000 cubic centimeters
Flow rate and velocity are related, but quite different, physical quantities. To make the distinction clear, consider the
flow rate of a river. The greater the velocity of the water, the greater the flow rate of the river. But flow rate also
depends on the size and shape of the river. A rapid mountain stream carries far less water than the Amazon River in
Brazil, for example. Figure 14.26 illustrates the volume flow rate. The volume flow rate is where
is the cross-sectional area of the pipe and v is the magnitude of the velocity.
The precise relationship between flow rate Qand average speed v is
where Ais the cross-sectional area and is the average speed. The relationship tells us that flow rate is directly
proportional to both the average speed of the fluid and the cross-sectional area of a river, pipe, or other conduit. The
larger the conduit, the greater its cross-sectional area. Figure 14.26 illustrates how this relationship is obtained. The
shaded cylinder has a volume , which flows past the point Pin a time t . Dividing both sides of this
relationship by tgives
We note that and the average speed is . Thus the equation becomes .
Figure 14.27 shows an incompressible fluid flowing along a pipe of decreasing radius. Because the fluid is
incompressible, the same amount of fluid must flow past any point in the tube in a given time to ensure continuity of
flow. The flow is continuous because they are no sources or sinks that add or remove mass, so the mass flowing into
the pipe must be equal the mass flowing out of the pipe. In this case, because the cross-sectional area of the pipe
decreases, the velocity must necessarily increase. This logic can be extended to say that the flow rate must be the
same at all points along the pipe. In particular, for arbitrary points 1 and 2,
14.14
This is called the equation of continuity and is valid for any incompressible fluid (with constant density). The
consequences of the equation of continuity can be observed when water flows from a hose into a narrow spray
nozzle: It emerges with a large speed—that is the purpose of the nozzle. Conversely, when a river empties into one
end of a reservoir, the water slows considerably, perhaps picking up speed again when it leaves the other end of the
reservoir. In other words, speed increases when cross-sectional area decreases, and speed decreases when cross-
sectional area increases.
Access for free at openstax.org
14.5 • Fluid Dynamics 679
FIGURE 14.27 When a tube narrows, the same volume occupies a greater length. For the same volume to pass points 1 and 2 in a given
time, the speed must be greater at point 2. The process is exactly reversible. If the fluid flows in the opposite direction, its speed decreases
when the tube widens. (Note that the relative volumes of the two cylinders and the corresponding velocity vector arrows are not drawn to
scale.)
Since liquids are essentially incompressible, the equation of continuity is valid for all liquids. However, gases are
compressible, so the equation must be applied with caution to gases if they are subjected to compression or
expansion.
EXAMPLE 14.5
Calculating Fluid Speed through a Nozzle
A nozzle with a diameter of 0.500 cm is attached to a garden hose with a radius of 0.900 cm. The flow rate through
hose and nozzle is 0.500 L/s. Calculate the speed of the water (a) in the hose and (b) in the nozzle.
Strategy
We can use the relationship between flow rate and speed to find both speeds. We use the subscript 1 for the hose
and 2 for the nozzle.
Solution
a. We solve the flow rate equation for speed and use for the cross-sectional area of the hose, obtaining
Substituting values and using appropriate unit conversions yields
b. We could repeat this calculation to find the speed in the nozzle give a somewhat different insight. The equation states
, but we use the equation of continuity to
Solving for and substituting for the cross-sectional area yields
Substituting known values,
Significance
A speed of 1.96 m/s is about right for water emerging from a hose with no nozzle. The nozzle produces a
considerably faster stream merely by constricting the flow to a narrower tube.
The solution to the last part of the example shows that speed is inversely proportional to the square of the radius of
the tube, making for large effects when radius varies. We can blow out a candle at quite a distance, for example, by
680 14 • Fluid Mechanics
pursing our lips, whereas blowing on a candle with our mouth wide open is quite ineffective.
Mass Conservation
The rate of flow of a fluid can also be described by the mass flow rat e or mass rate of flow. This is the rate at which a
mass of the fluid moves past a point. Refer once again to Figure 14.26, but this time consider the mass in the
shaded volume. The mass can be determined from the density and the volume:
The mass flow rate is then
where is the density, Ais the cross-sectional area, and v is the magnitude of the velocity. The mass flow rate is an
important quantity in fluid dynamics and can be used to solve many problems. Consider Figure 14.27. The pipe in
the figure starts at the inlet with a cross sectional area of and constricts to an outlet with a smaller cross
sectional area of . The mass of fluid entering the pipe has to be equal to the mass of fluid leaving the pipe. For
this reason the velocity at the outlet is greater than the velocity of the inlet . Using the fact that the mass of
fluid entering the pipe must be equal to the mass of fluid exiting the pipe, we can find a relationship between the
velocity and the cross-sectional area by taking the rate of change of the mass in and the mass out:
14.15
Equation 14.15 is also known as the continuity equation in general form. If the density of the fluid remains constant
through the constriction—that is, the fluid is incompressible—then the density cancels from the continuity equation,
The equation reduces to show that the volume flow rate into the pipe equals the volume flow rate out of the pipe.
FIGURE 14.28 Geometry for deriving the equation of continuity. The amount of liquid entering the cross-sectional (shaded) area must equal
the amount of liquid leaving the cross-sectional area if the liquid is incompressible.
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the terms in Bernoulli’s equation
• Explain how Bernoulli’s equation is related to the conservation of energy
• Describe how to derive Bernoulli’s principle from Bernoulli’s equation
• Perform calculations using Bernoulli’s principle
• Describe some applications of Bernoulli’s principle
As we showed in Figure 14.27, when a fluid flows into a narrower channel, its speed increases. That means its
kinetic energy also increases. The increased kinetic energy comes from the net work done on the fluid to push it into
the channel. Also, if the fluid changes vertical position, work is done on the fluid by the gravitational force.
A pressure difference occurs when the channel narrows. This pressure difference results in a net force on the fluid
because the pressure times the area equals the force, and this net force does work. Recall the work-energy
theorem,
Access for free at openstax.org
14.6 • Bernoulli’s Equation 681
The net work done increases the fluid’s kinetic energy. As a result, the pressure drops in a rapidly moving fluid
whether or not the fluid is confined to a tube.
There are many common examples of pressure dropping in rapidly moving fluids. For instance, shower curtains have
a disagreeable habit of bulging into the shower stall when the shower is on. The reason is that the high-velocity
stream of water and air creates a region of lower pressure inside the shower, whereas the pressure on the other side
remains at the standard atmospheric pressure. This pressure difference results in a net force, pushing the curtain
inward. Similarly, when a car passes a truck on the highway, the two vehicles seem to pull toward each other. The
reason is the same: The high velocity of the air between the car and the truck creates a region of lower pressure
between the vehicles, and they are pushed together by greater pressure on the outside (Figure 14.29). This effect
was observed as far back as the mid-1800s, when it was found that trains passing in opposite directions tipped
precariously toward one another.
FIGURE 14.29 An overhead view of a car passing a truck on a highway. Air passing between the vehicles flows in a narrower channel and
), causing the pressure between them to drop ( is less than Greater pressure on the
must increase its speed ( is greater than outside pushes the car and truck together.
Energy Conservation and Bernoulli’s Equation
The application of the principle of conservation of energy to frictionless laminar flow leads to a very useful relation
between pressure and flow speed in a fluid. This relation is called Bernoulli’s equation, named after Daniel
Bernoulli (1700–1782), who published his studies on fluid motion in his book Hydrodynamica (1738).
Consider an incompressible fluid flowing through a pipe that has a varying diameter and height, as shown in Figure
14.30. Subscripts 1 and 2 in the figure denote two locations along the pipe and illustrate the relationships between
the areas of the cross sections A , the speed of flow v, the height from ground y, and the pressure p at each point. We
assume here that the density at the two points is the same—therefore, density is denoted by without any
subscripts—and since the fluid is incompressible, the shaded volumes must be equal.
FIGURE 14.30 The geometry used for the derivation of Bernoulli’s equation.
We also assume that there are no viscous forces in the fluid, so the energy of any part of the fluid will be conserved.
682 14 • Fluid Mechanics
To derive Bernoulli’s equation, we first calculate the work that was done on the fluid:
The work done was due to the conservative force of gravity and the change in the kinetic energy of the fluid. The
change in the kinetic energy of the fluid is equal to
The change in potential energy is
The energy equation then becomes
Rearranging the equation gives Bernoulli’s equation:
This relation states that the mechanical energy of any part of the fluid changes as a result of the work done by the
fluid external to that part, due to varying pressure along the way. Since the two points were chosen arbitrarily, we
can write Bernoulli’s equation more generally as a conservation principle along the flow.
BERNOULLI’S EQUATION
For an incompressible, frictionless fluid, the combination of pressure and the sum of kinetic and potential energy
densities is constant not only over time, but also along a streamline:
14.16
A special note must be made here of the fact that in a dynamic situation, the pressures at the same height in
different parts of the fluid may be different if they have different speeds of flow.
Analyzing Bernoulli’s Equation
According to Bernoulli’s equation, if we follow a small volume of fluid along its path, various quantities in the sum
may change, but the total remains constant. Bernoulli’s equation is, in fact, just a convenient statement of
conservation of energy for an incompressible fluid in the absence of friction.
The general form of Bernoulli’s equation has three terms in it, and it is broadly applicable. To understand it better, let
us consider some specific situations that simplify and illustrate its use and meaning.
Bernoulli’s equation for static fluids
First consider the very simple situation where the fluid is static—that is, case is
Bernoulli’s equation in that
We can further simplify the equation by setting (Any height can be chosen for a reference height of zero, as
is often done for other situations involving gravitational force, making all other heights relative.) In this case, we get
This equation tells us that, in static fluids, pressure increases with depth. As we go from point 1 to point 2 in the
Access for free at openstax.org
14.6 • Bernoulli’s Equation 683
fluid, the depth increases by , and consequently, is greater than by an amount . In the very simplest
case, is zero at the top of the fluid, and we get the familiar relationship . and
Thus, Bernoulli’s equation confirms the fact that the pressure change due to the weight of a fluid is
. Although we introduce Bernoulli’s equation for fluid motion, it includes much of what we studied for static
fluids earlier.
Bernoulli’s principle
Suppose a fluid is moving but its depth is constant—that is, becomes
. Under this condition, Bernoulli’s equation
Situations in which fluid flows at a constant depth are so common that this equation is often also called Bernoulli’s
principle, which is simply Bernoulli’s equation for fluids at constant depth. (Note again that this applies to a small
volume of fluid as we follow it along its path.) Bernoulli’s principle reinforces the fact that pressure drops as speed
increases in a moving fluid: If is greater than in the equation, then must be less than for the equality to
hold.
EXAMPLE 14.6
Calculating Pressure
In Example 14.5, we found that the speed of water in a hose increased from 1.96 m/s to 25.5 m/s going from the
hose to the nozzle. Calculate the pressure in the hose, given that the absolute pressure in the nozzle is
(atmospheric, as it must be) and assuming level, frictionless flow.
Strategy
Level flow means constant depth, so Bernoulli’s principle applies. We use the subscript 1 for values in the hose and
2 for those in the nozzle. We are thus asked to find .
Solution
Solving Bernoulli’s principle for yields
Substituting known values,
Significance
This absolute pressure in the hose is greater than in the nozzle, as expected, since v is greater in the nozzle. The
pressure in the nozzle must be atmospheric, because the water emerges into the atmosphere without other
changes in conditions.
Applications of Bernoulli’s Principle
Many devices and situations occur in which fluid flows at a constant height and thus can be analyzed with Bernoulli’s
principle.
Entrainment
People have long put the Bernoulli principle to work by using reduced pressure in high-velocity fluids to move things
about. With a higher pressure on the outside, the high-velocity fluid forces other fluids into the stream. This process
is called entrainment . Entrainment devices have been in use since ancient times as pumps to raise water to small
heights, as is necessary for draining swamps, fields, or other low-lying areas. Some other devices that use the
concept of entrainment are shown in Figure 14.31.
684 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.31 Entrainment devices use increased fluid speed to create low pressures, which then entrain one fluid into another. (a) A
Bunsen burner uses an adjustable gas nozzle, entraining air for proper combustion. (b) An atomizer uses a squeeze bulb to create a jet of air
that entrains drops of perfume. Paint sprayers and carburetors use very similar techniques to move their respective liquids. (c) A common
aspirator uses a high-speed stream of water to create a region of lower pressure. Aspirators may be used as suction pumps in dental and
surgical situations or for draining a flooded basement or producing a reduced pressure in a vessel. (d) The chimney of a water heater is
designed to entrain air into the pipe leading through the ceiling.
Velocity measurement
Figure 14.32 shows two devices that apply Bernoulli’s principle to measure fluid velocity. The manometer in part (a)
is connected to two tubes that are small enough not to appreciably disturb the flow. The tube facing the oncoming
fluid creates a dead spot having zero velocity ( ) in front of it, while fluid passing the other tube has velocity
. This means that Bernoulli’s principle as stated in
becomes
Thus pressure over the second opening is reduced by connected to the second opening, where
, so the fluid in the manometer rises by hon the side
(Recall that the symbol means “proportional to.”) Solving for , we see that
Part (b) shows a version of this device that is in common use for measuring various fluid velocities; such devices are
frequently used as air-speed indicators in aircraft.
FIGURE 14.32 Measurement of fluid speed based on Bernoulli’s principle. (a) A manometer is connected to two tubes that are close
Access for free at openstax.org
14.6 • Bernoulli’s Equation 685
together and small enough not to disturb the flow. Tube 1 is open at the end facing the flow. A dead spot having zero speed is created there.
Tube 2 has an opening on the side, so the fluid has a speed v across the opening; thus, pressure there drops. The difference in pressure at
the manometer is , so his proportional to (b) This type of velocity measuring device is a Prandtl tube, also known as a pitot
tube.
A fire hose
All preceding applications of Bernoulli’s equation involved simplifying conditions, such as constant height or
constant pressure. The next example is a more general application of Bernoulli’s equation in which pressure,
velocity, and height all change.
EXAMPLE 14.7
Calculating Pressure: A Fire Hose Nozzle
Fire hoses used in major structural fires have an inside diameter of 6.40 cm (Figure 14.33). Suppose such a hose
carries a flow of 40.0 L/s, starting at a gauge pressure of . The hose rises up 10.0 m along a ladder
to a nozzle having an inside diameter of 3.00 cm. What is the pressure in the nozzle?
FIGURE 14.33 Pressure in the nozzle of this fire hose is less than at ground level for two reasons: The water has to go uphill to get to the
nozzle, and speed increases in the nozzle. In spite of its lowered pressure, the water can exert a large force on anything it strikes by virtue
of its kinetic energy. Pressure in the water stream becomes equal to atmospheric pressure once it emerges into the air.
Strategy
We must use Bernoulli’s equation to solve for the pressure, since depth is not constant.
Solution
Bernoulli’s equation is
where subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the initial conditions at ground level and the final conditions inside the nozzle,
respectively. We must first find the speeds and . Since , we get
Similarly, we find
This rather large speed is helpful in reaching the fire. Now, taking to be zero, we solve Bernoulli’s equation for :
Substituting known values yields
686 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Significance
This value is a gauge pressure, since the initial pressure was given as a gauge pressure. Thus, the nozzle pressure
equals atmospheric pressure because the water exits into the atmosphere without changes in its conditions.
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what viscosity is
• Calculate flow and resistance with Poiseuille's law
• Explain how pressure drops due to resistance
• Calculate the Reynolds number for an object moving through a fluid
• Use the Reynolds number for a system to determine whether it is laminar or turbulent
• Describe the conditions under which an object has a terminal speed
In Applications of Newton’s Laws, which introduced the concept of friction, we saw that an object sliding across the
floor with an initial velocity and no applied force comes to rest due to the force of friction. Friction depends on the
types of materials in contact and is proportional to the normal force. We also discussed drag and air resistance in
that same chapter. We explained that at low speeds, the drag is proportional to the velocity, whereas at high speeds,
drag is proportional to the velocity squared. In this section, we introduce the forces of friction that act on fluids in
motion. For example, a fluid flowing through a pipe is subject to resistance, a type of friction, between the fluid and
the walls. Friction also occurs between the different layers of fluid. These resistive forces affect the way the fluid
flows through the pipe.
Viscosity and Laminar Flow
When you pour yourself a glass of juice, the liquid flows freely and quickly. But if you pour maple syrup on your
pancakes, that liquid flows slowly and sticks to the pitcher. The difference is fluid friction, both within the fluid itself
and between the fluid and its surroundings. We call this property of fluids viscosity. Juice has low viscosity, whereas
syrup has high viscosity.
The precise definition of viscosity is based on laminar, or nonturbulent, flow. Figure 14.34 shows schematically how
laminar and turbulent flow differ. When flow is laminar, layers flow without mixing. When flow is turbulent, the layers
mix, and significant velocities occur in directions other than the overall direction of flow.
FIGURE 14.34 (a) Laminar flow occurs in layers without mixing. Notice that viscosity causes drag between layers as well as with the fixed
surface. The speed near the bottom of the flow ( ) is less than speed near the top ( ) because in this case, the surface of the containing
vessel is at the bottom. (b) An obstruction in the vessel causes turbulent flow. Turbulent flow mixes the fluid. There is more interaction,
greater heating, and more resistance than in laminar flow.
Access for free at openstax.org
14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 687
Turbulence is a fluid flow in which layers mix together via eddies and swirls. It has two main causes. First, any
obstruction or sharp corner, such as in a faucet, creates turbulence by imparting velocities perpendicular to the flow.
Second, high speeds cause turbulence. The drag between adjacent layers of fluid and between the fluid and its
surroundings can form swirls and eddies if the speed is great enough. In Figure 14.35, the speed of the accelerating
smoke reaches the point that it begins to swirl due to the drag between the smoke and the surrounding air.
FIGURE 14.35 Smoke rises smoothly for a while and then begins to form swirls and eddies. The smooth flow is called laminar flow,
whereas the swirls and eddies typify turbulent flow. Smoke rises more rapidly when flowing smoothly than after it becomes turbulent,
suggesting that turbulence poses more resistance to flow. (credit: “Creativity103”/Flickr)
Figure 14.36 shows how viscosity is measured for a fluid. The fluid to be measured is placed between two parallel
plates. The bottom plate is held fixed, while the top plate is moved to the right, dragging fluid with it. The layer (or
lamina) of fluid in contact with either plate does not move relative to the plate, so the top layer moves at speed v
while the bottom layer remains at rest. Each successive layer from the top down exerts a force on the one below it,
trying to drag it along, producing a continuous variation in speed from v to 0 as shown. Care is taken to ensure that
the flow is laminar, that is, the layers do not mix. The motion in the figure is like a continuous shearing motion. Fluids
have zero shear strength, but the rate at which they are sheared is related to the same geometrical factors Aand L
as is shear deformation for solids. In the diagram, the fluid is initially at rest. The layer of fluid in contact with the
moving plate is accelerated and starts to move due to the internal friction between moving plate and the fluid. The
next layer is in contact with the moving layer; since there is internal friction between the two layers, it also
accelerates, and so on through the depth of the fluid. There is also internal friction between the stationary plate and
the lowest layer of fluid, next to the station plate. The force is required to keep the plate moving at a constant
velocity due to the internal friction.
FIGURE 14.36 Measurement of viscosity for laminar flow of fluid between two plates of area A . The bottom plate is fixed. When the top
plate is pushed to the right, it drags the fluid along with it.
A force Fis required to keep the top plate in Figure 14.36 moving at a constant velocity v, and experiments have
shown that this force depends on four factors. First, Fis directly proportional to v (until the speed is so high that
turbulence occurs—then a much larger force is needed, and it has a more complicated dependence on v). Second, F
is proportional to the area Aof the plate. This relationship seems reasonable, since Ais directly proportional to the
amount of fluid being moved. Third, Fis inversely proportional to the distance between the plates L . This
688 14 • Fluid Mechanics
relationship is also reasonable; Lis like a lever arm, and the greater the lever arm, the less the force that is needed.
Fourth, Fis directly proportional to the coefficient of viscosity, . The greater the viscosity, the greater the force
required. These dependencies are combined into the equation
This equation gives us a working definition of fluid viscosity . Solving for gives
14.17
which defines viscosity in terms of how it is measured.
The SI unit of viscosity is . Table 14.4 lists the coefficients of viscosity for
various fluids. Viscosity varies from one fluid to another by several orders of magnitude. As you might expect, the
viscosities of gases are much less than those of liquids, and these viscosities often depend on temperature.
Fluid Temperature Viscosity
Pa ⋅ s
Air 0 0.0171
20 0.0181
40 0.0190
100 0.0218
Ammonia 20 0.00974
Carbon dioxide 20 0.0147
Helium 20 0.0196
Hydrogen 0 0.0090
Mercury 20 0.0450
Oxygen 20 0.0203
Steam 100 0.0130
Liquid water 0 1.792
20 1.002
37 0.6947
40 0.653
100 0.282
TABLE 14.4 Coefficients of Viscosity of Various Fluids
Access for free at openstax.org
14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 689
Fluid Temperature Viscosity
Pa ⋅ s
Whole blood 20 3.015
37 2.084
Blood plasma 20 1.810
37 1.257
Ethyl alcohol 20 1.20
Methanol 20 0.584
Oil (heavy machine) 20 660
Oil (motor, SAE 10) 30 200
Oil (olive) 20 138
Glycerin 20 1500
Honey 20 2000–10000
Maple syrup 20 2000–3000
Milk 20 3.0
Oil (corn) 20 65
TABLE 14.4 Coefficients of Viscosity of Various Fluids
Laminar Flow Confined to Tubes: Poiseuille’s Law
What causes flow? The answer, not surprisingly, is a pressure difference. In fact, there is a very simple relationship
between horizontal flow and pressure. Flow rate Qis in the direction from high to low pressure. The greater the
pressure differential between two points, the greater the flow rate. This relationship can be stated as
where and are the pressures at two points, such as at either end of a tube, and Ris the resistance to flow. The
resistance Rincludes everything, except pressure, that affects flow rate. For example, Ris greater for a long tube
than for a short one. The greater the viscosity of a fluid, the greater the value of R . Turbulence greatly increases R ,
whereas increasing the diameter of a tube decreases R .
If viscosity is zero, the fluid is frictionless and the resistance to flow is also zero. Comparing frictionless flow in a
tube to viscous flow, as in Figure 14.37, we see that for a viscous fluid, speed is greatest at midstream because of
drag at the boundaries. We can see the effect of viscosity in a Bunsen burner flame [part (c)], even though the
viscosity of natural gas is small.
690 14 • Fluid Mechanics
FIGURE 14.37 (a) If fluid flow in a tube has negligible resistance, the speed is the same all across the tube. (b) When a viscous fluid flows
through a tube, its speed at the walls is zero, increasing steadily to its maximum at the center of the tube. (c) The shape of a Bunsen burner
flame is due to the velocity profile across the tube. (credit c: modification of work by "jasonwoodhead23"/Flickr)
The resistance Rto laminar flow of an incompressible fluid with viscosity radius r and length l , is given by
through a horizontal tube of uniform
14.18
This equation is called Poiseuille’s law for resistance, named after the French scientist J. L. Poiseuille
(1799–1869), who derived it in an attempt to understand the flow of blood through the body.
Let us examine Poiseuille’s expression for Rto see if it makes good intuitive sense. We see that resistance is directly
proportional to both fluid viscosity and the length lof a tube. After all, both of these directly affect the amount of
friction encountered—the greater either is, the greater the resistance and the smaller the flow. The radius r of a tube
affects the resistance, which again makes sense, because the greater the radius, the greater the flow (all other
factors remaining the same). But it is surprising that r is raised to the fourth power in Poiseuille’s law. This exponent
means that any change in the radius of a tube has a very large effect on resistance. For example, doubling the radius
of a tube decreases resistance by a factor of .
Taken together, and give the following expression for flow rate:
14.19
This equation describes laminar flow through a tube. It is sometimes called Poiseuille’s law for laminar flow, or
simply Poiseuille’s law (Figure 14.38).
FIGURE 14.38 Poiseuille’s law applies to laminar flow of an incompressible fluid of viscosity direction of flow is from greater to lower pressure. Flow rate Qis directly proportional to the pressure difference through a tube of length land radius r. The
, and inversely
Access for free at openstax.org
14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 691
proportional to the length lof the tube and viscosity of the fluid. Flow rate increases with radius by a factor of .
EXAMPLE 14.8
Using Flow Rate: Air Conditioning Systems
An air conditioning system is being designed to supply air at a gauge pressure of 0.054 Pa at a temperature of
The air is sent through an insulated, round conduit with a diameter of 18.00 cm. The conduit is 20-meters long and
is open to a room at atmospheric pressure 101.30 kPa. The room has a length of 12 meters, a width of 6 meters,
and a height of 3 meters. (a) What is the volume flow rate through the pipe, assuming laminar flow? (b) Estimate the
length of time to completely replace the air in the room. (c) The builders decide to save money by using a conduit
with a diameter of 9.00 cm. What is the new flow rate?
Strategy
Assuming laminar flow, Poiseuille’s law states that
We need to compare the conduit radius before and after the flow rate reduction. Note that we are given the diameter
of the conduit, so we must divide by two to get the radius.
Solution
a. Assuming a constant pressure difference and using the viscosity ,
b. Assuming constant flow
c. Using laminar flow, Poiseuille’s law yields
Thus, the radius of the conduit decreases by half reduces the flow rate to 6.25% of the original value.
Significance
In general, assuming laminar flow, decreasing the radius has a more dramatic effect than changing the length. If the
length is increased and all other variables remain constant, the flow rate is decreased:
Doubling the length cuts the flow rate to one-half the original flow rate.
If the radius is decreased and all other variables remain constant, the volume flow rate decreases by a much larger
factor.
692 14 • Fluid Mechanics
Cutting the radius in half decreases the flow rate to one-sixteenth the original flow rate.
Flow and Resistance as Causes of Pressure Drops
Water pressure in homes is sometimes lower than normal during times of heavy use, such as hot summer days. The
drop in pressure occurs in the water main before it reaches individual homes. Let us consider flow through the water
main as illustrated in Figure 14.39. We can understand why the pressure to the home drops during times of
heavy use by rearranging the equation for flow rate:
In this case, is the pressure at the water works and Ris the resistance of the water main. During times of heavy
use, the flow rate Qis large. This means that must also be large. Thus must decrease. It is correct to
think of flow and resistance as causing the pressure to drop from to . The equation is valid for
both laminar and turbulent flows.
FIGURE 14.39 During times of heavy use, there is a significant pressure drop in a water main, and than created at the water works. If the flow is very small, then the pressure drop is negligible, and .
supplied to users is significantly less
We can also use to analyze pressure drops occurring in more complex systems in which the tube
radius is not the same everywhere. Resistance is much greater in narrow places, such as in an obstructed coronary
artery. For a given flow rate Q , the pressure drop is greatest where the tube is most narrow. This is how water
faucets control flow. Additionally, Ris greatly increased by turbulence, and a constriction that creates turbulence
greatly reduces the pressure downstream. Plaque in an artery reduces pressure and hence flow, both by its
resistance and by the turbulence it creates.
Measuring Turbulence
An indicator called the Reynolds number uniform diameter, the Reynolds number is defined as
can reveal whether flow is laminar or turbulent. For flow in a tube of
14.20
where is the fluid density, v its speed, its viscosity, and r the tube radius. The Reynolds number is a
dimensionless quantity. Experiments have revealed that is related to the onset of turbulence. For about 2000, flow is laminar. For above about 3000, flow is turbulent.
below
Access for free at openstax.org
14.7 • Viscosity and Turbulence 693
For values of between about 2000 and 3000, flow is unstable—that is, it can be laminar, but small obstructions
and surface roughness can make it turbulent, and it may oscillate randomly between being laminar and turbulent. In
fact, the flow of a fluid with a Reynolds number between 2000 and 3000 is a good example of chaotic behavior. A
system is defined to be chaotic when its behavior is so sensitive to some factor that it is extremely difficult to
predict. It is difficult, but not impossible, to predict whether flow is turbulent or not when a fluid’s Reynold’s number
falls in this range due to extremely sensitive dependence on factors like roughness and obstructions on the nature of
the flow. A tiny variation in one factor has an exaggerated (or nonlinear) effect on the flow.
EXAMPLE 14.9
This
Using Flow Rate: Turbulent Flow or Laminar Flow
In Example 14.8, we found the volume flow rate of an air conditioning system to be calculation assumed laminar flow. (a) Was this a good assumption? (b) At what velocity would the flow become
turbulent?
Strategy
To determine if the flow of air through the air conditioning system is laminar, we first need to find the velocity, which
can be found by
Then we can calculate the Reynold’s number, using the equation below, and determine if it falls in the range for
laminar flow
Solution
a. Using the values given:
b. Since the Reynolds number is 1835 < 2000, the flow is laminar and not turbulent. The assumption that the
flow was laminar is valid.
To find the maximum speed of the air to keep the flow laminar, consider the Reynold’s number.
Significance
When transferring a fluid from one point to another, it desirable to limit turbulence. Turbulence results in wasted
energy, as some of the energy intended to move the fluid is dissipated when eddies are formed. In this case, the air
conditioning system will become less efficient once the velocity exceeds 0.16 m/s, since this is the point at which
turbulence will begin to occur.
694 14 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
absolute pressure sum of gauge pressure and
atmospheric pressure
Archimedes’ principle buoyant force on an object
equals the weight of the fluid it displaces
Bernoulli’s equation equation resulting from
applying conservation of energy to an
incompressible frictionless fluid:
throughout the fluid
Bernoulli’s equation applied at
Bernoulli’s principle constant depth:
hydrostatic equilibrium state at which water is not
flowing, or is static
ideal fluid fluid with negligible viscosity
laminar flow type of fluid flow in which layers do not
mix
Pascal’s principle change in pressure applied to an
enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished to all
portions of the fluid and to the walls of its container
Poiseuille’s law rate of laminar flow of an
incompressible fluid in a tube:
Poiseuille’s law for resistance resistance to laminar
flow of an incompressible fluid in a tube:
pressure force per unit area exerted perpendicular to
the area over which the force acts
Reynolds number dimensionless parameter that can
reveal whether a particular flow is laminar or
turbulent
specific gravity ratio of the density of an object to a
fluid (usually water)
turbulence fluid flow in which layers mix together via
eddies and swirls
turbulent flow type of fluid flow in which layers mix
together via eddies and swirls
viscosity measure of the internal friction in a fluid
buoyant force net upward force on any object in any
fluid due to the pressure difference at different
depths
density mass per unit volume of a substance or
object
flow rate abbreviated Q , it is the volume Vthat flows
past a particular point during a time t , or
fluids liquids and gases; a fluid is a state of matter
that yields to shearing forces
gauge pressure pressure relative to atmospheric
pressure
hydraulic jack simple machine that uses cylinders of
different diameters to distribute force
Key Equations
Density of a sample at constant density
Pressure
Pressure at a depth hin a fluid of constant density
Change of pressure with height in a
constant-density fluid
Absolute pressure
Pascal’s principle
Volume flow rate
Continuity equation (constant density)
Continuity equation (general form)
Bernoulli’s equation
Viscosity
Poiseuille’s law for resistance
Poiseuille’s law
Access for free at openstax.org
14 • Chapter Review 695
Summary
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure
• A fluid is a state of matter that yields to sideways
or shearing forces. Liquids and gases are both
fluids. Fluid statics is the physics of stationary
fluids.
• Density is the mass per unit volume of a
substance or object, defined as The SI
unit of density is
• Pressure is the force per unit perpendicular area
over which the force is applied, The SI
unit of pressure is the pascal: .
• Pressure due to the weight of a liquid of constant
density is given by , where p is the
pressure, his the depth of the liquid, is the
density of the liquid, and g is the acceleration
due to gravity.
14.2 Measuring Pressure
• Gauge pressure is the pressure relative to
atmospheric pressure.
• Absolute pressure is the sum of gauge pressure
and atmospheric pressure.
• Open-tube manometers have U-shaped tubes
and one end is always open. They are used to
measure pressure. A mercury barometer is a
device that measures atmospheric pressure.
• The SI unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa), but
several other units are commonly used.
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
• Pressure is force per unit area.
• A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid
is transmitted undiminished to all portions of the
fluid and to the walls of its container.
• A hydraulic system is an enclosed fluid system
used to exert forces.
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
• Buoyant force is the net upward force on any
object in any fluid. If the buoyant force is greater
than the object’s weight, the object will rise to
the surface and float. If the buoyant force is less
than the object’s weight, the object will sink. If
the buoyant force equals the object’s weight, the
object can remain suspended at its present
depth. The buoyant force is always present and
acting on any object immersed either partially or
entirely in a fluid.
• Archimedes’ principle states that the buoyant
force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it
displaces.
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
• Flow rate Qis defined as the volume Vflowing
past a point in time t , or where Vis
volume and tis time. The SI unit of flow rate is
but other rates can be used, such as L/min.
• Flow rate and velocity are related by
where Ais the cross-sectional area of the flow
and v is its average velocity.
• The equation of continuity states that for an
incompressible fluid, the mass flowing into a pipe
must equal the mass flowing out of the pipe.
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
• Bernoulli’s equation states that the sum on each
side of the following equation is constant, or the
same at any two points in an incompressible
frictionless fluid:
• Bernoulli’s principle is Bernoulli’s equation
applied to situations in which the height of the
fluid is constant. The terms involving depth (or
height h ) subtract out, yielding
• Bernoulli’s principle has many applications,
including entrainment and velocity
measurement.
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
• Laminar flow is characterized by smooth flow of
the fluid in layers that do not mix.
• Turbulence is characterized by eddies and swirls
that mix layers of fluid together.
• Fluid viscosity is due to friction within a fluid.
• Flow is proportional to pressure difference and
inversely proportional to resistance:
• The pressure drop caused by flow and resistance
is given by .
• The Reynolds number can reveal whether
flow is laminar or turbulent. It is .
• For below about 2000, flow is laminar. For
above about 3000, flow is turbulent. For
values of between 2000 and 3000, it may be
either or both.
696 14 • Chapter Review
Conceptual Questions
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure
1. 2. 3. 4. Which of the following substances are fluids at
room temperature and atmospheric pressure:
air, mercury, water, glass?
Why are gases easier to compress than liquids
and solids?
Explain how the density of air varies with
altitude.
The image shows a glass of ice water filled to the
brim. Will the water overflow when the ice
melts? Explain your answer.
5. How is pressure related to the sharpness of a
knife and its ability to cut?
6. Why is a force exerted by a static fluid on a
surface always perpendicular to the surface?
7. Imagine that in a remote location near the North
Pole, a chunk of ice floats in a lake. Next to the
lake, a glacier with the same volume as the
floating ice sits on land. If both chunks of ice
should melt due to rising global temperatures,
and the melted ice all goes into the lake, which
one would cause the level of the lake to rise the
most? Explain.
8. In ballet, dancing en point e (on the tips of the
toes) is much harder on the toes than normal
dancing or walking. Explain why, in terms of
pressure.
9. Atmospheric pressure exerts a large force (equal
to the weight of the atmosphere above your
body—about 10 tons) on the top of your body
when you are lying on the beach sunbathing.
Why are you able to get up?
10. Why does atmospheric pressure decrease more
rapidly than linearly with altitude?
11. The image shows how sandbags placed around a
Access for free at openstax.org
leak outside a river levee can effectively stop the
flow of water under the levee. Explain how the small
amount of water inside the column of sandbags is
able to balance the much larger body of water
behind the levee.
12. 13. 14. Is there a net force on a dam due to atmospheric
pressure? Explain your answer.
Does atmospheric pressure add to the gas
pressure in a rigid tank? In a toy balloon? When,
in general, does atmospheric pressure not affect
the total pressure in a fluid?
You can break a strong wine bottle by pounding
a cork into it with your fist, but the cork must
press directly against the liquid filling the
bottle—there can be no air between the cork and
liquid. Explain why the bottle breaks only if there
is no air between the cork and liquid.
14.2 Measuring Pressure
15. Explain why the fluid reaches equal levels on
either side of a manometer if both sides are
open to the atmosphere, even if the tubes are of
different diameters.
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
16. Suppose the master cylinder in a hydraulic
system is at a greater height than the cylinder it
is controlling. Explain how this will affect the
force produced at the cylinder that is being
controlled.
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
17. More force is required to pull the plug in a full
bathtub than when it is empty. Does this
contradict Pascal’s principle? Explain your
answer.
Do fluids exert buoyant forces in a “weightless”
environment, such as in the space shuttle?
Explain your answer.
18. 
19. 20. Will the same ship float higher in salt water than
in freshwater? Explain your answer.
Marbles dropped into a partially filled bathtub
sink to the bottom. Part of their weight is
supported by buoyant force, yet the downward
force on the bottom of the tub increases by
exactly the weight of the marbles. Explain why.
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
21. Many figures in the text show streamlines.
Explain why fluid velocity is greatest where
streamlines are closest together. (Hint: Consider
the relationship between fluid velocity and the
cross-sectional area through which the fluid
flows.)
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
22. You can squirt water from a garden hose a
considerably greater distance by partially
covering the opening with your thumb. Explain
how this works.
Water is shot nearly vertically upward in a
decorative fountain and the stream is observed
to broaden as it rises. Conversely, a stream of
water falling straight down from a faucet
narrows. Explain why.
Look back to Figure 14.29. Answer the following
two questions. Why is less than atmospheric?
Why is greater than ?
A tube with a narrow segment designed to
enhance entrainment is called a Venturi, such as
shown below. Venturis are very commonly used
in carburetors and aspirators. How does this
structure bolster entrainment?
23. 24. 25. 26. 27. Some chimney pipes have a T-shape, with a
crosspiece on top that helps draw up gases
whenever there is even a slight breeze. Explain
how this works in terms of Bernoulli’s principle.
Is there a limit to the height to which an
entrainment device can raise a fluid? Explain
your answer.
28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 14 • Chapter Review 697
Why is it preferable for airplanes to take off into
the wind rather than with the wind?
Roofs are sometimes pushed off vertically during
a tropical cyclone, and buildings sometimes
explode outward when hit by a tornado. Use
Bernoulli’s principle to explain these
phenomena.
It is dangerous to stand close to railroad tracks
when a rapidly moving commuter train passes.
Explain why atmospheric pressure would push
you toward the moving train.
Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less
than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli
effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water
can emerge from the nozzle against the
opposing atmospheric pressure.
David rolled down the window on his car while
driving on the freeway. An empty plastic bag on
the floor promptly flew out the window. Explain
why.
Based on Bernoulli’s equation, what are three
forms of energy in a fluid? (Note that these
forms are conservative, unlike heat transfer and
other dissipative forms not included in
Bernoulli’s equation.)
The old rubber boot shown below has two leaks. To
what maximum height can the water squirt from
Leak 1? How does the velocity of water emerging
from Leak 2 differ from that of Leak 1? Explain your
responses in terms of energy.
Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less
than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli
effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water
can emerge from the nozzle against the
opposing atmospheric pressure.
698 14 • Chapter Review
14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
36. 37. 38. Explain why the viscosity of a liquid decreases
with temperature, that is, how might an increase
in temperature reduce the effects of cohesive
forces in a liquid? Also explain why the viscosity
of a gas increases with temperature, that is, how
does increased gas temperature create more
collisions between atoms and molecules?
When paddling a canoe upstream, it is wisest to
travel as near to the shore as possible. When
canoeing downstream, it is generally better to
stay near the middle. Explain why.
Plumbing usually includes air-filled tubes near water
faucets (see the following figure). Explain why they
are needed and how they work.
43. Problems
14.1 Fluids, Density, and Pressure
41. Gold is sold by the troy ounce (31.103 g). What
is the volume of 1 troy ounce of pure gold?
42. Mercury is commonly supplied in flasks
containing 34.5 kg (about 76 lb.). What is the
volume in liters of this much mercury?
What is the mass of a deep breath of air having a
volume of 2.00 L? Discuss the effect taking such
a breath has on your body’s volume and density.
A straightforward method of finding the density
of an object is to measure its mass and then
measure its volume by submerging it in a
graduated cylinder. What is the density of a
240-g rock that displaces of water?
(Note that the accuracy and practical
applications of this technique are more limited
than a variety of others that are based on
44. Access for free at openstax.org
39. 40. Doppler ultrasound can be used to measure the
speed of blood in the body. If there is a partial
constriction of an artery, where would you
expect blood speed to be greatest: at or after
the constriction? What are the two distinct
causes of higher resistance in the constriction?
Sink drains often have a device such as that shown
below to help speed the flow of water. How does
this work?
45. 46. 47. 48. Archimedes’ principle.)
Suppose you have a coffee mug with a circular
cross-section and vertical sides (uniform radius).
What is its inside radius if it holds 375 g of
coffee when filled to a depth of 7.50 cm?
Assume coffee has the same density as water.
A rectangular gasoline tank can hold 50.0 kg of
gasoline when full. What is the depth of the tank
if it is 0.500-m wide by 0.900-m long? (b)
Discuss whether this gas tank has a reasonable
volume for a passenger car.
A trash compactor can compress its contents to
0.350 times their original volume. Neglecting the
mass of air expelled, by what factor is the
density of the rubbish increased?
A 2.50-kg steel gasoline can holds 20.0 L of
gasoline when full. What is the average density
of the full gas can, taking into account the
49. 50. 51. 52. volume occupied by steel as well as by gasoline?
What is the density of 18.0-karat gold that is a
mixture of 18 parts gold, 5 parts silver, and 1
part copper? (These values are parts by mass,
not volume.) Assume that this is a simple
mixture having an average density equal to the
weighted densities of its constituents.
The tip of a nail exerts tremendous pressure
when hit by a hammer because it exerts a large
force over a small area. What force must be
exerted on a nail with a circular tip of 1.00-mm
diameter to create a pressure of
(This high pressure is
possible because the hammer striking the nail is
brought to rest in such a short distance.)
A glass tube contains mercury. What would be
the height of the column of mercury which
would create pressure equal to 1.00 atm?
The greatest ocean depths on Earth are found in
the Marianas Trench near the Philippines.
Calculate the pressure due to the ocean at the
bottom of this trench, given its depth is 11.0 km
and assuming the density of seawater is
constant all the way down.
53. Verify that the SI unit of is .
54. What pressure is exerted on the bottom of a gas
tank that is 0.500-m wide and 0.900-m long and
can hold 50.0 kg of gasoline when full?
55. A dam is used to hold back a river. The dam has a
height and a width Assume
that the density of the water is (a)
Determine the net force on the dam. (b) Why does
the thickness of the dam increase with depth?
14.2 Measuring Pressure
56. Find the gauge and absolute pressures in the
balloon and peanut jar shown in Figure 14.12,
assuming the manometer connected to the
14 • Chapter Review 699
57. 58. 60. balloon uses water and the manometer
connected to the jar contains mercury. Express
in units of centimeters of water for the balloon
and millimeters of mercury for the jar, taking
for each.
How tall must a water-filled manometer be to
measure blood pressure as high as 300 mm Hg?
Assuming bicycle tires are perfectly flexible and
support the weight of bicycle and rider by
pressure alone, calculate the total area of the
tires in contact with the ground if a bicycle and
rider have a total mass of 80.0 kg, and the gauge
pressure in the tires is .
14.3 Pascal's Principle and Hydraulics
59. How much pressure is transmitted in the
hydraulic system considered in Example 14.3?
Express your answer in atmospheres.
What force must be exerted on the master
cylinder of a hydraulic lift to support the weight
of a 2000-kg car (a large car) resting on a second
cylinder? The master cylinder has a 2.00-cm
diameter and the second cylinder has a 24.0-cm
diameter.
A host pours the remnants of several bottles of
wine into a jug after a party. The host then
inserts a cork with a 2.00-cm diameter into the
bottle, placing it in direct contact with the wine.
The host is amazed when the host pounds the
cork into place and the bottom of the jug (with a
14.0-cm diameter) breaks away. Calculate the
extra force exerted against the bottom if he
pounded the cork with a 120-N force.
A certain hydraulic system is designed to exert a
force 100 times as large as the one put into it.
(a) What must be the ratio of the area of the
cylinder that is being controlled to the area of
the master cylinder? (b) What must be the ratio
of their diameters? (c) By what factor is the
distance through which the output force moves
reduced relative to the distance through which
the input force moves? Assume no losses due to
friction.
Verify that work input equals work output for a
hydraulic system assuming no losses due to
friction. Do this by showing that the distance the
output force moves is reduced by the same
factor that the output force is increased. Assume
the volume of the fluid is constant. What effect
would friction within the fluid and between
61. 62. 63. 
700 14 • Chapter Review
66. 67. components in the system have on the output
force? How would this depend on whether or not
the fluid is moving?
14.4 Archimedes’ Principle and Buoyancy
64. What fraction of ice is submerged when it floats
in freshwater, given the density of water at
is very close to ?
65. If a person’s body has a density of ,
what fraction of the body will be submerged
when floating gently in (a) freshwater? (b) In salt
water with a density of ?
A rock with a mass of 540 g in air is found to
have an apparent mass of 342 g when
submerged in water. (a) What mass of water is
displaced? (b) What is the volume of the rock?
(c) What is its average density? Is this consistent
with the value for granite?
Archimedes’ principle can be used to calculate
the density of a fluid as well as that of a solid.
Suppose a chunk of iron with a mass of 390.0 g
in air is found to have an apparent mass of 350.5
g when completely submerged in an unknown
liquid. (a) What mass of fluid does the iron
displace? (b) What is the volume of iron, using its
density as given in Table 14.1? (c) Calculate the
fluid’s density and identify it.
Calculate the buoyant force on a 2.00-L helium
balloon. (b) Given the mass of the rubber in the
balloon is 1.50 g, what is the net vertical force
on the balloon if it is let go? Neglect the volume
of the rubber.
What is the density of a woman who floats in
fresh water with of her volume above the
surface? (This could be measured by placing her
in a tank with marks on the side to measure how
much water she displaces when floating and
when held under water.) (b) What percent of her
volume is above the surface when she floats in
seawater?
A man has a mass of 80 kg and a density of
(excluding the air in his lungs). (a)
Calculate his volume. (b) Find the buoyant force
air exerts on him. (c) What is the ratio of the
buoyant force to his weight?
A simple compass can be made by placing a
small bar magnet on a cork floating in water. (a)
What fraction of a plain cork will be submerged
when floating in water? (b) If the cork has a
68. 69. 70. 71. Access for free at openstax.org
72. 73. 74. mass of 10.0 g and a 20.0-g magnet is placed on
it, what fraction of the cork will be submerged?
(c) Will the bar magnet and cork float in ethyl
alcohol?
What percentage of an iron anchor’s weight will
be supported by buoyant force when submerged
in salt water?
Referring to Figure 14.20, prove that the
buoyant force on the cylinder is equal to the
weight of the fluid displaced (Archimedes’
principle). You may assume that the buoyant
force is and that the ends of the
cylinder have equal areas . Note that the
volume of the cylinder (and that of the fluid it
displaces) equals .
A 75.0-kg man floats in freshwater with 3.00%
of his volume above water when his lungs are
empty, and 5.00% of his volume above water
when his lungs are full. Calculate the volume of
air he inhales—called his lung capacity—in liters.
(b) Does this lung volume seem reasonable?
14.5 Fluid Dynamics
75. What is the average flow rate in of
gasoline to the engine of a car traveling at 100
km/h if it averages 10.0 km/L?
76. The heart of a resting adult pumps blood at a
rate of 5.00 L/min. (a) Convert this to What is this rate in ?
. (b)
77. The Huka Falls on the Waikato River is one of
New Zealand’s most visited natural tourist
attractions. On average, the river has a flow rate
of about 300,000 L/s. At the gorge, the river
narrows to 20-m wide and averages 20-m deep.
(a) What is the average speed of the river in the
gorge? (b) What is the average speed of the
water in the river downstream of the falls when
it widens to 60 m and its depth increases to an
average of 40 m?
(a) Estimate the time it would take to fill a
private swimming pool with a capacity of 80,000
L using a garden hose delivering 60 L/min. (b)
How long would it take if you could divert a
moderate size river, flowing at into
the pool?
What is the fluid speed in a fire hose with a
9.00-cm diameter carrying 80.0 L of water per
second? (b) What is the flow rate in cubic meters
per second? (c) Would your answers be different
78. 79. 
14 • Chapter Review 701
80. 88. 81. 82. if salt water replaced the fresh water in the fire
hose?
Water is moving at a velocity of 2.00 m/s
through a hose with an internal diameter of 1.60
cm. (a) What is the flow rate in liters per second?
(b) The fluid velocity in this hose’s nozzle is 15.0
m/s. What is the nozzle’s inside diameter?
Prove that the speed of an incompressible fluid
through a constriction, such as in a Venturi tube,
increases by a factor equal to the square of the
factor by which the diameter decreases. (The
converse applies for flow out of a constriction
into a larger-diameter region.)
Water emerges straight down from a faucet with
a 1.80-cm diameter at a speed of 0.500 m/s.
(Because of the construction of the faucet, there
is no variation in speed across the stream.) (a)
What is the flow rate in ? (b) What is the
diameter of the stream 0.200 m below the
faucet? Neglect any effects due to surface
tension.
14.6 Bernoulli’s Equation
83. Verify that pressure has units of energy per unit
volume.
84. Suppose you have a wind speed gauge like the
pitot tube shown in Figure 14.32. By what factor
must wind speed increase to double the value of
hin the manometer? Is this independent of the
moving fluid and the fluid in the manometer?
If the pressure reading of your pitot tube is 15.0
mm Hg at a speed of 200 km/h, what will it be at
700 km/h at the same altitude?
Every few years, winds in Boulder, Colorado,
attain sustained speeds of 45.0 m/s (about 100
mph) when the jet stream descends during early
spring. Approximately what is the force due to
the Bernoulli equation on a roof having an area
of ? Typical air density in Boulder is
, and the corresponding atmospheric
pressure is . (Bernoulli’s
principle as stated in the text assumes laminar
flow. Using the principle here produces only an
approximate result, because there is significant
turbulence.)
What is the pressure drop due to the Bernoulli
Effect as water goes into a 3.00-cm-diameter
nozzle from a 9.00-cm-diameter fire hose while
carrying a flow of 40.0 L/s? (b) To what
89. maximum height above the nozzle can this water
rise? (The actual height will be significantly
smaller due to air resistance.)
(a) Using Bernoulli’s equation, show that the
measured fluid speed v for a pitot tube, like the
one in Figure 14.32(b), is given by
, where his the height of the
manometer fluid, is the density of the
manometer fluid, is the density of the moving
fluid, and g is the acceleration due to gravity.
(Note that v is indeed proportional to the square
root of h , as stated in the text.) (b) Calculate v for
moving air if a mercury manometer’s his 0.200
m.
A container of water has a cross-sectional area of
. A piston sits on top of the water (see
the following figure). There is a spout located 0.15
m from the bottom of the tank, open to the
atmosphere, and a stream of water exits the spout.
The cross sectional area of the spout is
. (a) What is the velocity of the
water as it leaves the spout? (b) If the opening of the
spout is located 1.5 m above the ground, how far
from the spout does the water hit the floor? Ignore
all friction and dissipative forces.
85. 86. 90. A fluid of a constant density flows through a
reduction in a pipe. Find an equation for the change
in pressure, in terms of , and the density.
87. 14.7 Viscosity and Turbulence
91. (a) Calculate the retarding force due to the
viscosity of the air layer between a cart and a
702 14 • Chapter Review
92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. level air track given the following information: air
temperature is , the cart is moving at
0.400 m/s, its surface area is
and the thickness of the air layer is
. (b) What is the ratio of this
force to the weight of the 0.300-kg cart?
The arterioles (small arteries) leading to an
organ constrict in order to decrease flow to the
organ. To shut down an organ, blood flow is
reduced naturally to 1.00% of its original value.
By what factor do the radii of the arterioles
constrict?
A spherical particle falling at a terminal speed in
a liquid must have the gravitational force
balanced by the drag force and the buoyant
force. The buoyant force is equal to the weight of
the displaced fluid, while the drag force is
assumed to be given by Stokes Law,
Show that the terminal speed is
given by , where Ris the
radius of the sphere, is its density, and is
the density of the fluid, and the coefficient of
viscosity.
Using the equation of the previous problem, find
the viscosity of motor oil in which a steel ball of
radius 0.8 mm falls with a terminal speed of
4.32 cm/s. The densities of the ball and the oil
are 7.86 and 0.88 g/mL, respectively.
A skydiver will reach a terminal velocity when
the air drag equals their weight. For a skydiver
with a large body, turbulence is a factor at high
speeds. The drag force then is approximately
proportional to the square of the velocity. Taking
the drag force to be and setting
this equal to the skydiver’s weight, find the
terminal speed for a person falling “spread
eagle.
”
(a) Verify that a 19.0% decrease in laminar flow
through a tube is caused by a 5.00% decrease in
radius, assuming that all other factors remain
constant. (b) What increase in flow is obtained
from a 5.00% increase in radius, again assuming
all other factors remain constant?
When physicians diagnose arterial blockages,
they quote the reduction in flow rate. If the flow
rate in an artery has been reduced to 10.0% of
its normal value by a blood clot and the average
pressure difference has increased by 20.0%, by
Access for free at openstax.org
98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103. what factor has the clot reduced the radius of
the artery?
An oil gusher shoots crude oil 25.0 m into the air
through a pipe with a 0.100-m diameter.
Neglecting air resistance but not the resistance
of the pipe, and assuming laminar flow, calculate
the pressure at the entrance of the 50.0-m-long
vertical pipe. Take the density of the oil to be
and its viscosity to be
(or ). Note that you must take into
account the pressure due to the 50.0-m column
of oil in the pipe.
Concrete is pumped from a cement mixer to the
place it is being laid, instead of being carried in
wheelbarrows. The flow rate is 200 L/min
through a 50.0-m-long, 8.00-cm-diameter hose,
and the pressure at the pump is
. (a) Calculate the resistance
of the hose. (b) What is the viscosity of the
concrete, assuming the flow is laminar? (c) How
much power is being supplied, assuming the
point of use is at the same level as the pump?
You may neglect the power supplied to increase
the concrete’s velocity.
Verify that the flow of oil is laminar for an oil
gusher that shoots crude oil 25.0 m into the air
through a pipe with a 0.100-m diameter. The
vertical pipe is 50 m long. Take the density of the
oil to be and its viscosity to be
(or ).
Calculate the Reynolds numbers for the flow of
water through (a) a nozzle with a radius of 0.250
cm and (b) a garden hose with a radius of 0.900
cm, when the nozzle is attached to the hose. The
flow rate through hose and nozzle is 0.500 L/s.
Can the flow in either possibly be laminar?
A fire hose has an inside diameter of 6.40 cm.
Suppose such a hose carries a flow of 40.0 L/s
starting at a gauge pressure of
. The hose goes 10.0 m up a
ladder to a nozzle having an inside diameter of
3.00 cm. Calculate the Reynolds numbers for
flow in the fire hose and nozzle to show that the
flow in each must be turbulent.
At what flow rate might turbulence begin to
develop in a water main with a 0.200-m
diameter? Assume a temperature.
Additional Problems
104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. Before digital storage devices, such as the
memory in your cell phone, music was stored on
vinyl disks with grooves with varying depths cut
into the disk. A phonograph used a needle,
which moved over the grooves, measuring the
depth of the grooves. The pressure exerted by a
phonograph needle on a record is surprisingly
large. If the equivalent of 1.00 g is supported by
a needle, the tip of which is a circle with a
0.200-mm radius, what pressure is exerted on
the record in Pa?
Water towers store water above the level of
consumers for times of heavy use, eliminating
the need for high-speed pumps. How high above
a user must the water level be to create a gauge
pressure of ?
The aqueous humor in a person’s eye is exerting
a force of 0.300 N on the area of the
cornea. What pressure is this in mm Hg?
(a) Convert normal blood pressure readings of
120 over 80 mm Hg to newtons per meter
squared using the relationship for pressure due
to the weight of a fluid rather than a
conversion factor. (b) Explain why the blood
pressure of an infant would likely be smaller
than that of an adult. Specifically, consider the
smaller height to which blood must be pumped.
Pressure cookers have been around for more
than 300 years, although their use has greatly
declined in recent years (early models had a
nasty habit of exploding). How much force must
the latches holding the lid onto a pressure
cooker be able to withstand if the circular lid is
in diameter and the gauge pressure
inside is 300 atm? Neglect the weight of the lid.
Bird bones have air pockets in them to reduce
their weight—this also gives them an average
density significantly less than that of the bones
of other animals. Suppose an ornithologist
weighs a bird bone in air and in water and finds
its mass is 45.0 g and its apparent mass when
submerged is 3.60 g (assume the bone is
watertight). (a) What mass of water is displaced?
(b) What is the volume of the bone? (c) What is
its average density?
In an immersion measurement of a woman’s
density, she is found to have a mass of 62.0 kg in
air and an apparent mass of 0.0850 kg when
completely submerged with lungs empty. (a)
111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116. 14 • Chapter Review 703
What mass of water does she displace? (b) What
is her volume? (c) Calculate her density. (d) If
her lung capacity is 1.75 L, is she able to float
without treading water with her lungs filled with
air?
Some fish have a density slightly less than that
of water and must exert a force (swim) to stay
submerged. What force must an 85.0-kg grouper
exert to stay submerged in salt water if its body
density is
The human circulation system has
approximately capillary vessels. Each
vessel has a diameter of about . Assuming
cardiac output is 5 L/min, determine the average
velocity of blood flow through each capillary
vessel.
The flow rate of blood through a
-radius capillary is
. (a) What is the speed of the
blood flow? (b) Assuming all the blood in the
body passes through capillaries, how many of
them must there be to carry a total flow of
?
The left ventricle of a resting adult’s heart
pumps blood at a flow rate of ,
increasing its pressure by 110 mm Hg, its speed
from zero to 30.0 cm/s, and its height by 5.00
cm. (All numbers are averaged over the entire
heartbeat.) Calculate the total power output of
the left ventricle. Note that most of the power is
used to increase blood pressure.
A sump pump (used to drain water from the
basement of houses built below the water table)
is draining a flooded basement at the rate of
0.750 L/s, with an output pressure of
. (a) The water enters a hose
with a 3.00-cm inside diameter and rises 2.50 m
above the pump. What is its pressure at this
point? (b) The hose goes over the foundation
wall, losing 0.500 m in height, and widens to
4.00 cm in diameter. What is the pressure now?
You may neglect frictional losses in both parts of
the problem.
A glucose solution being administered with an IV
has a flow rate of . What will the
new flow rate be if the glucose is replaced by
whole blood having the same density but a
viscosity 2.50 times that of the glucose? All
704 14 • Chapter Review
other factors remain constant.
117. A small artery has a length of and
a radius of . If the pressure drop
across the artery is 1.3 kPa, what is the flow rate
through the artery? (Assume that the
temperature is .)
118. Angioplasty is a technique in which arteries
partially blocked with plaque are dilated to
increase blood flow. By what factor must the
radius of an artery be increased in order to
Challenge Problems
120. 121. 122. 123. 124. 125. The pressure on the dam shown early in the
problems section increases with depth.
Therefore, there is a net torque on the dam. Find
the net torque.
The temperature of the atmosphere is not
always constant and can increase or decrease
with height. In a neutral atmosphere, where
there is not a significant amount of vertical
mixing, the temperature decreases at a rate of
approximately 6.5 K per km. The magnitude of
the decrease in temperature as height increases
is known as the lapse rate (The symbol is
the upper case Greek letter gamma.) Assume
that the surface pressure is
where and
the lapse rate is . Estimate the
pressure 3.0 km above the surface of Earth.
A submarine is stranded on the bottom of the
ocean with its hatch 25.0 m below the surface.
Calculate the force needed to open the hatch
from the inside, given it is circular and 0.450 m
in diameter. Air pressure inside the submarine is
1.00 atm.
Logs sometimes float vertically in a lake because
one end has become water-logged and denser
than the other. What is the average density of a
uniform-diameter log that floats with 20.0% of
its length above water?
Scurrilous con artists have been known to
represent gold-plated tungsten ingots as pure
gold and sell them at prices much below gold
value but high above the cost of tungsten. With
what accuracy must you be able to measure the
mass of such an ingot in and out of water to tell
that it is almost pure tungsten rather than pure
gold?
The inside volume of a house is equivalent to
Access for free at openstax.org
119. 126. 127. increase blood flow by a factor of 10?
Suppose a blood vessel’s radius is decreased to
90.0% of its original value by plaque deposits
and the body compensates by increasing the
pressure difference along the vessel to keep the
flow rate constant. By what factor must the
pressure difference increase? (b) If turbulence is
created by the obstruction, what additional
effect would it have on the flow rate?
that of a rectangular solid 13.0 m wide by 20.0
m long by 2.75 m high. The house is heated by a
forced air gas heater. The main uptake air duct of
the heater is 0.300 m in diameter. What is the
average speed of air in the duct if it carries a
volume equal to that of the house’s interior
every 15 minutes?
A garden hose with a diameter of 2.0 cm is used
to fill a bucket, which has a volume of 0.10 cubic
meters. It takes 1.2 minutes to fill. An adjustable
nozzle is attached to the hose to decrease the
diameter of the opening, which increases the
speed of the water. The hose is held level to the
ground at a height of 1.0 meters and the
diameter is decreased until a flower bed 3.0
meters away is reached. (a) What is the volume
flow rate of the water through the nozzle when
the diameter is 2.0 cm? (b) What is the speed of
the water coming out of the hose? (c) What does
the speed of the water coming out of the hose
need to be to reach the flower bed 3.0 meters
away? (d) What is the diameter of the nozzle
needed to reach the flower bed?
A frequently quoted rule of thumb in aircraft
design is that wings should produce about 1000
N of lift per square meter of wing. (The fact that
a wing has a top and bottom surface does not
double its area.) (a) At takeoff, an aircraft travels
at 60.0 m/s, so that the air speed relative to the
bottom of the wing is 60.0 m/s. Given the sea
level density of air as , how fast must
it move over the upper surface to create the
ideal lift? (b) How fast must air move over the
upper surface at a cruising speed of 245 m/s
and at an altitude where air density is one-fourth
that at sea level? (Note that this is not all of the
aircraft’s lift—some comes from the body of the
plane, some from engine thrust, and so on.
Furthermore, Bernoulli’s principle gives an
128. 129. approximate answer because flow over the wing
creates turbulence.)
Two pipes of equal and constant diameter leave a
water pumping station and dump water out of an
open end that is open to the atmosphere (see the
following figure). The water enters at a pressure of
two atmospheres and a speed of .
One pipe drops a height of 10 m. What is the velocity
of the water as the water leaves each pipe?
Fluid originally flows through a tube at a rate of
. To illustrate the sensitivity of flow
rate to various factors, calculate the new flow
rate for the following changes with all other
factors remaining the same as in the original
conditions. (a) Pressure difference increases by
a factor of 1.50. (b) A new fluid with 3.00 times
greater viscosity is substituted. (c) The tube is
replaced by one having 4.00 times the length.
(d) Another tube is used with a radius 0.100
times the original. (e) Yet another tube is
substituted with a radius 0.100 times the
original and half the length, and the pressure
difference is increased by a factor of 1.50.
130. 131. 132. 14 • Chapter Review 705
During a marathon race, a runner’s blood flow
increases to 10.0 times her resting rate. Her
blood’s viscosity has dropped to 95.0% of its
normal value, and the blood pressure difference
across the circulatory system has increased by
50.0%. By what factor has the average radii of
her blood vessels increased?
Water supplied to a house by a water main has a
pressure of early on a
summer day when neighborhood use is low. This
pressure produces a flow of 20.0 L/min through
a garden hose. Later in the day, pressure at the
exit of the water main and entrance to the house
drops, and a flow of only 8.00 L/min is obtained
through the same hose. (a) What pressure is now
being supplied to the house, assuming
resistance is constant? (b) By what factor did the
flow rate in the water main increase in order to
cause this decrease in delivered pressure? The
pressure at the entrance of the water main is
, and the original flow rate
was 200 L/min. (c) How many more users are
there, assuming each would consume 20.0 L/
min in the morning?
Gasoline is piped underground from refineries to
major users. The flow rate is
(about 500 gal/min), the viscosity of gasoline is
, and its density is
(a) What minimum diameter must
the pipe have if the Reynolds number is to be
less than 2000? (b) What pressure difference
must be maintained along each kilometer of the
pipe to maintain this flow rate?
706 14 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 15
Oscillations
FIGURE 15.1 (a) The Comcast Building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, looming high above the skyline, is approximately 305 meters (1000
feet) tall. At this height, the top floors can oscillate back and forth due to seismic activity and fluctuating winds. (b) Shown above is a
schematic drawing of a tuned, liquid-column mass damper, installed at the top of the Comcast, consisting of a 300,000-gallon reservoir of
water to reduce oscillations.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion
15.4 Pendulums
15.5 Damped Oscillations
15.6 Forced Oscillations
INTRODUCTION
We begin the study of oscillations with simple systems of pendulums and springs. Although these
systems may seem quite basic, the concepts involved have many real-life applications. For example, the Comcast
Building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, stands approximately 305 meters (1000 feet) tall. As buildings are built
taller, they can act as inverted, physical pendulums, with the top floors oscillating due to seismic activity and
fluctuating winds. In the Comcast Building, a tuned-mass damper is used to reduce the oscillations. Installed at the
top of the building is a tuned, liquid-column mass damper, consisting of a 300,000-gallon reservoir of water. This U-
shaped tank allows the water to oscillate freely at a frequency that matches the natural frequency of the building.
Damping is provided by tuning the turbulence levels in the moving water using baffles.
708 15 • Oscillations
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the terms period and frequency
• List the characteristics of simple harmonic motion
• Explain the concept of phase shift
• Write the equations of motion for the system of a mass and spring undergoing simple harmonic motion
• Describe the motion of a mass oscillating on a vertical spring
When you pluck a guitar string, the resulting sound has a steady tone and lasts a long time (Figure 15.2). The string
vibrates around an equilibrium position, and one oscillation is completed when the string starts from the initial
position, travels to one of the extreme positions, then to the other extreme position, and returns to its initial
position. We define periodic motion to be any motion that repeats itself at regular time intervals, such as exhibited
by the guitar string or by a child swinging on a swing. In this section, we study the basic characteristics of
oscillations and their mathematical description.
FIGURE 15.2 When a guitar string is plucked, the string oscillates up and down in periodic motion. The vibrating string causes the
surrounding air molecules to oscillate, producing sound waves. (credit: Yutaka Tsutano)
Period and Frequency in Oscillations
In the absence of friction, the time to complete one oscillation remains constant and is called the period (T ). Its
units are usually seconds, but may be any convenient unit of time. The word ‘period’ refers to the time for some
event whether repetitive or not, but in this chapter, we shall deal primarily in periodic motion, which is by definition
repetitive.
A concept closely related to period is the frequency of an event. Frequency (f ) is defined to be the number of events
per unit time. For periodic motion, frequency is the number of oscillations per unit time. The relationship between
frequency and period is
15.1
The SI unit for frequency is the hertz (Hz) and is defined as one cycle per second :
A cycle is one complete oscillation.
Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 • Simple Harmonic Motion 709
EXAMPLE 15.1
Determining the Frequency of Medical Ultrasound
Ultrasound machines are used by medical professionals to make images for examining internal organs of the body.
An ultrasound machine emits high-frequency sound waves, which reflect off the organs, and a computer receives
the waves, using them to create a picture. We can use the formulas presented in this module to determine the
frequency, based on what we know about oscillations. Consider a medical imaging device that produces ultrasound
by oscillating with a period of . What is the frequency of this oscillation?
Strategy
The period (T ) is given and we are asked to find frequency (f ).
Solution
Substitute for Tin :
Solve to find
Significance
This frequency of sound is much higher than the highest frequency that humans can hear (the range of human
hearing is 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz); therefore, it is called ultrasound. Appropriate oscillations at this frequency generate
ultrasound used for noninvasive medical diagnoses, such as observations of a fetus in the womb.
Characteristics of Simple Harmonic Motion
A very common type of periodic motion is called simple harmonic motion (SHM). A system that oscillates with SHM
is called a simple harmonic oscillator.
SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
In simple harmonic motion, the acceleration of the system, and therefore the net force, is proportional to the
displacement and acts in the opposite direction of the displacement.
A good example of SHM is an object with mass m attached to a spring on a frictionless surface, as shown in Figure
15.3. The object oscillates around the equilibrium position, and the net force on the object is equal to the force
provided by the spring. This force obeys Hooke’s law as discussed in a previous chapter.
If the net force can be described by Hooke’s law and there is no damping (slowing down due to friction or other
nonconservative forces), then a simple harmonic oscillator oscillates with equal displacement on either side of the
equilibrium position, as shown for an object on a spring in Figure 15.3. The maximum displacement from
equilibrium is called the amplitude (A ). The units for amplitude and displacement are the same but depend on the
type of oscillation. For the object on the spring, the units of amplitude and displacement are meters.
710 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.3 An object attached to a spring sliding on a frictionless surface is an uncomplicated simple harmonic oscillator. In the above
set of figures, a mass is attached to a spring and placed on a frictionless table. The other end of the spring is attached to the wall. The
position of the mass, when the spring is neither stretched nor compressed, is marked as and is the equilibrium position. (a) The mass
is displaced to a position and released from rest. (b) The mass accelerates as it moves in the negative x-direction, reaching a
maximum negative velocity at . (c) The mass continues to move in the negative x-direction, slowing until it comes to a stop at
. (d) The mass now begins to accelerate in the positive x-direction, reaching a positive maximum velocity at . (e) The mass then
continues to move in the positive direction until it stops at . The mass continues in SHM that has an amplitude Aand a period T . The
object’s maximum speed occurs as it passes through equilibrium. The stiffer the spring is, the smaller the period T . The greater the mass of
the object is, the greater the period T .
What is so significant about SHM? For one thing, the period Tand frequency fof a simple harmonic oscillator are
independent of amplitude. The string of a guitar, for example, oscillates with the same frequency whether plucked
gently or hard.
Two important factors do affect the period of a simple harmonic oscillator. The period is related to how stiff the
system is. A very stiff object has a large force constant (k ), which causes the system to have a smaller period. For
example, you can adjust a diving board’s stiffness—the stiffer it is, the faster it vibrates, and the shorter its period.
Period also depends on the mass of the oscillating system. The more massive the system is, the longer the period.
For example, a heavy person on a diving board bounces up and down more slowly than a light one. In fact, the mass
m and the force constant kare the onl y factors that affect the period and frequency of SHM. To derive an equation
for the period and the frequency, we must first define and analyze the equations of motion. Note that the force
constant is sometimes referred to as the spring constant .
Equations of SHM
Consider a block attached to a spring on a frictionless table (Figure 15.4). The equilibrium position (the position
where the spring is neither stretched nor compressed) is marked as . At the equilibrium position, the net force
is zero.
FIGURE 15.4 A block is attached to a spring and placed on a frictionless table. The equilibrium position, where the spring is neither
extended nor compressed, is marked as
Work is done on the block to pull it out to a position of and it is then released from rest. The maximum
x-position (A ) is called the amplitude of the motion. The block begins to oscillate in SHM between and
Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 • Simple Harmonic Motion 711
where Ais the amplitude of the motion and Tis the period of the oscillation. The period is the time for one
oscillation. Figure 15.5 shows the motion of the block as it completes one and a half oscillations after release.
Figure 15.6 shows a plot of the position of the block versus time. When the position is plotted versus time, it is clear
that the data can be modeled by a cosine function with an amplitude Aand a period T . The cosine function
repeats every multiple of whereas the motion of the block repeats every period T . However, the function
repeats every integer multiple of the period. The maximum of the cosine function is one, so it is
necessary to multiply the cosine function by the amplitude A .
15.2
Recall from the chapter on rotation that the angular frequency equals so the angular frequency is defined as divided by the period, .
. In this case, the period is constant,
FIGURE 15.5 A block is attached to one end of a spring and placed on a frictionless table. The other end of the spring is anchored to the
wall. The equilibrium position, where the net force equals zero, is marked as Work is done on the block, pulling it out to ,
and the block is released from rest. The block oscillates between and . The force is also shown as a vector.
712 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.6 A graph of the position of the block shown in Figure 15.5 as a function of time. The position can be modeled as a periodic
function, such as a cosine or sine function.
The equation for the position as a function of time is good for modeling data, where the position
of the block at the initial time is at the amplitude Aand the initial velocity is zero. Often when taking
experimental data, the position of the mass at the initial time is not equal to the amplitude and the initial
velocity is not zero. Consider 10 seconds of data collected by a student in lab, shown in Figure 15.7.
FIGURE 15.7 Data collected by a student in lab indicate the position of a block attached to a spring, measured with a sonic range finder.
The data are collected starting at time but the initial position is near position , so the initial position
does not equal the amplitude . The velocity is the time derivative of the position, which is the slope at a point on the graph of
position versus time. The velocity is not at time , as evident by the slope of the graph of position versus time, which
is not zero at the initial time.
The data in Figure 15.7 can still be modeled with a periodic function, like a cosine function, but the function is
shifted to the right. This shift is known as a phase shift and is usually represented by the Greek letter phi equation of the position as a function of time for a block on a spring becomes
. The
This is the generalized equation for SHM where tis the time measured in seconds, is the angular frequency with
units of inverse seconds, Ais the amplitude measured in meters or centimeters, and is the phase shift measured
in radians (Figure 15.8). It should be noted that because sine and cosine functions differ only by a phase shift, this
motion could be modeled using either the cosine or sine function.
FIGURE 15.8 (a) A cosine function. (b) A cosine function shifted to the left by an angle . The angle is known as the phase shift of the
function.
The velocity of the mass on a spring, oscillating in SHM, can be found by taking the derivative of the position
Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 • Simple Harmonic Motion 713
equation:
Because the sine function oscillates between –1 and +1, the maximum velocity is the amplitude times the angular
frequency, . The maximum velocity occurs at the equilibrium position when the mass is moving
toward . The maximum velocity in the negative direction is attained at the equilibrium position when
the mass is moving toward and is equal to .
The acceleration of the mass on the spring can be found by taking the time derivative of the velocity:
, and the
The maximum acceleration is acceleration at the position and is equal to .
. The maximum acceleration occurs at the position Summary of Equations of Motion for SHM
In summary, the oscillatory motion of a block on a spring can be modeled with the following equations of motion:
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
15.7
15.8
Here, Ais the amplitude of the motion, Tis the period, frequency of the motion of the block.
is the phase shift, and is the angular
EXAMPLE 15.2
Determining the Equations of Motion for a Block and a Spring
A 2.00-kg block is placed on a frictionless surface. A spring with a force constant of is attached to
the block, and the opposite end of the spring is attached to the wall. The spring can be compressed or extended.
The equilibrium position is marked as
Work is done on the block, pulling it out to and The block is released from rest and oscillates between
The period of the motion is 1.57 s. Determine the equations of motion.
Strategy
We first find the angular frequency. The phase shift is zero, because the block is released from rest at
Once the angular frequency is found, we can determine the maximum velocity and maximum
acceleration.
Solution
The angular frequency can be found and used to find the maximum velocity and maximum acceleration:
All that is left is to fill in the equations of motion:
714 15 • Oscillations
Significance
The position, velocity, and acceleration can be found for any time. It is important to remember that when using
these equations, your calculator must be in radians mode.
The Period and Frequency of a Mass on a Spring
One interesting characteristic of the SHM of an object attached to a spring is that the angular frequency, and
therefore the period and frequency of the motion, depend on only the mass and the force constant, and not on other
factors such as the amplitude of the motion. We can use the equations of motion and Newton’s second law
to find equations for the angular frequency, frequency, and period.
Consider the block on a spring on a frictionless surface. There are three forces on the mass: the weight, the normal
force, and the force due to the spring. The only two forces that act perpendicular to the surface are the weight and
the normal force, which have equal magnitudes and opposite directions, and thus sum to zero. The only force that
acts parallel to the surface is the force due to the spring, so the net force must be equal to the force of the spring:
Substituting the equations of motion for x and a gives us
Cancelling out like terms and solving for the angular frequency yields
15.9
The angular frequency depends only on the force constant and the mass, and not the amplitude. The angular
frequency is defined as which yields an equation for the period of the motion:
15.10
The period also depends only on the mass and the force constant. The greater the mass, the longer the period. The
stiffer the spring, the shorter the period. The frequency is
15.11
Access for free at openstax.org
15.1 • Simple Harmonic Motion 715
Vertical Motion and a Horizontal Spring
When a spring is hung vertically and a block is attached and set in motion, the block oscillates in SHM. In this case,
there is no normal force, and the net effect of the force of gravity is to change the equilibrium position. Consider
Figure 15.9. Two forces act on the block: the weight and the force of the spring. The weight is constant and the force
of the spring changes as the length of the spring changes.
FIGURE 15.9 A spring is hung from the ceiling. When a block is attached, the block is at the equilibrium position where the weight of the
block is equal to the force of the spring. (a) The spring is hung from the ceiling and the equilibrium position is marked as . (b) A mass is
attached to the spring and a new equilibrium position is reached ( ) when the force provided by the spring equals the weight
of the mass. (c) The free-body diagram of the mass shows the two forces acting on the mass: the weight and the force of the spring.
When the block reaches the equilibrium position, as seen in Figure 15.9, the force of the spring equals the weight of
the block, , where
From the figure, the change in the position is and since , we have
If the block is displaced and released, it will oscillate around the new equilibrium position. As shown in Figure
15.10, if the position of the block is recorded as a function of time, the recording is a periodic function.
If the block is displaced to a position y, the net force becomes the equilibrium position, . But we found that at
. Substituting for the weight in the equation yields
Recall that to is just the equilibrium position and any position can be set to be the point The net force then becomes
So let’s set
This is just what we found previously for a horizontally sliding mass on a spring. The constant force of gravity only
served to shift the equilibrium location of the mass. Therefore, the solution should be the same form as for a block
on a horizontal spring, The equations for the velocity and the acceleration also have the
same form as for the horizontal case. Note that the inclusion of the phase shift means that the motion can actually
be modeled using either a cosine or a sine function, since these two functions only differ by a phase shift.
716 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.10 Graphs of y(t ), v(t ), and a(t ) versus tfor the motion of an object on a vertical spring. The net force on the object can be
described by Hooke’s law, so the object undergoes SHM. Note that the initial position has the vertical displacement at its maximum value A ;
v is initially zero and then negative as the object moves down; the initial acceleration is negative, back toward the equilibrium position and
becomes zero at that point.
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the energy conservation of the system of a mass and a spring
• Explain the concepts of stable and unstable equilibrium points
To produce a deformation in an object, we must do work. That is, whether you pluck a guitar string or compress a
car’s shock absorber, a force must be exerted through a distance. If the only result is deformation, and no work goes
Access for free at openstax.org
15.2 • Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion 717
into thermal, sound, or kinetic energy, then all the work is initially stored in the deformed object as some form of
potential energy.
Consider the example of a block attached to a spring on a frictionless table, oscillating in SHM. The force of the
spring is a conservative force (which you studied in the chapter on potential energy and conservation of energy), and
we can define a potential energy for it. This potential energy is the energy stored in the spring when the spring is
extended or compressed. In this case, the block oscillates in one dimension with the force of the spring acting
parallel to the motion:
When considering the energy stored in a spring, the equilibrium position, marked as is the position at
which the energy stored in the spring is equal to zero. When the spring is stretched or compressed a distance x, the
potential energy stored in the spring is
Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator
To study the energy of a simple harmonic oscillator, we need to consider all the forms of energy. Consider the
example of a block attached to a spring, placed on a frictionless surface, oscillating in SHM. The potential energy
stored in the deformation of the spring is
In a simple harmonic oscillator, the energy oscillates between kinetic energy of the mass and potential
energy stored in the spring. In the SHM of the mass and spring system, there are no dissipative forces,
so the total energy is the sum of the potential energy and kinetic energy. In this section, we consider the
conservation of energy of the system. The concepts examined are valid for all simple harmonic oscillators, including
those where the gravitational force plays a role.
Consider Figure 15.11, which shows an oscillating block attached to a spring. In the case of undamped SHM, the
energy oscillates back and forth between kinetic and potential, going completely from one form of energy to the
other as the system oscillates. So for the simple example of an object on a frictionless surface attached to a spring,
the motion starts with all of the energy stored in the spring as elastic potential energy. As the object starts to move,
the elastic potential energy is converted into kinetic energy, becoming entirely kinetic energy at the equilibrium
position. The energy is then converted back into elastic potential energy by the spring as it is stretched or
compressed. The velocity becomes zero when the kinetic energy is completely converted, and this cycle then
repeats. Understanding the conservation of energy in these cycles will provide extra insight here and in later
applications of SHM, such as alternating circuits.
718 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.11 The transformation of energy in SHM for an object attached to a spring on a frictionless surface. (a) When the mass is at the
position , all the energy is stored as potential energy in the spring . The kinetic energy is equal to zero because the
velocity of the mass is zero. (b) As the mass moves toward , the mass crosses the position . At this point, the spring is neither
extended nor compressed, so the potential energy stored in the spring is zero. At , the total energy is all kinetic energy where
. (c) The mass continues to move until it reaches where the mass stops and starts moving toward . At
the position , the total energy is stored as potential energy in the compressed and the kinetic energy is zero. (d) As
the mass passes through the position , the kinetic energy is and the potential energy stored in the spring is zero. (e)
The mass returns to the position , where and .
Consider Figure 15.11, which shows the energy at specific points on the periodic motion. While staying constant, the
energy oscillates between the kinetic energy of the block and the potential energy stored in the spring:
The motion of the block on a spring in SHM is defined by the position . Using these equations, the trigonometric identity with a velocity of
and , we
can find the total energy of the system:
The total energy of the system of a block and a spring is equal to the sum of the potential energy stored in the spring
plus the kinetic energy of the block and is proportional to the square of the amplitude The total
energy of the system is constant.
A closer look at the energy of the system shows that the kinetic energy oscillates like a sine-squared function, while
the potential energy oscillates like a cosine-squared function. However, the total energy for the system is constant
and is proportional to the amplitude squared. Figure 15.12 shows a plot of the potential, kinetic, and total energies
of the block and spring system as a function of time. Also plotted are the position and velocity as a function of time.
Before time the block is attached to the spring and placed at the equilibrium position. Work is done on the
Access for free at openstax.org
15.2 • Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion 719
block by applying an external force, pulling it out to a position of . The system now has potential energy
stored in the spring. At time the position of the block is equal to the amplitude, the potential energy
stored in the spring is equal to , and the force on the block is maximum and points in the negative
x-direction . The velocity and kinetic energy of the block are zero at time At time
the block is released from rest.
FIGURE 15.12 Graph of the kinetic energy, potential energy, and total energy of a block oscillating on a spring in SHM. Also shown are the
graphs of position versus time and velocity versus time. The total energy remains constant, but the energy oscillates between kinetic
energy and potential energy. When the kinetic energy is maximum, the potential energy is zero. This occurs when the velocity is maximum
and the mass is at the equilibrium position. The potential energy is maximum when the speed is zero. The total energy is the sum of the
kinetic energy plus the potential energy and it is constant.
Oscillations About an Equilibrium Position
We have just considered the energy of SHM as a function of time. Another interesting view of the simple harmonic
oscillator is to consider the energy as a function of position. Figure 15.13 shows a graph of the energy versus
position of a system undergoing SHM.
FIGURE 15.13 A graph of the kinetic energy (red), potential energy (blue), and total energy (green) of a simple harmonic oscillator. The
force is equal to . The equilibrium position is shown as a black dot and is the point where the force is equal to zero. The force is
positive when , negative when , and equal to zero when .
The potential energy curve in Figure 15.13 resembles a bowl. When a marble is placed in a bowl, it settles to the
equilibrium position at the lowest point of the bowl . This happens because a restoring force points toward
720 15 • Oscillations
the equilibrium point. This equilibrium point is sometimes referred to as a fixed point . When the marble is disturbed
to a different position , the marble oscillates around the equilibrium position. Looking back at the graph of
potential energy, the force can be found by looking at the slope of the potential energy graph . Since the
force on either side of the fixed point points back toward the equilibrium point, the equilibrium point is called a
stable equilibrium point. The points and are called the turning points. (See Potential Energy and
Conservation of Energy.)
Stability is an important concept. If an equilibrium point is stable, a slight disturbance of an object that is initially at
the stable equilibrium point will cause the object to oscillate around that point. The stable equilibrium point occurs
because the force on either side is directed toward it. For an unstable equilibrium point, if the object is disturbed
slightly, it does not return to the equilibrium point.
Consider the marble in the bowl example. If the bowl is right-side up, the marble, if disturbed slightly, will oscillate
around the stable equilibrium point. If the bowl is turned upside down, the marble can be balanced on the top, at
the equilibrium point where the net force is zero. However, if the marble is disturbed slightly, it will not return to the
equilibrium point, but will instead roll off the bowl. The reason is that the force on either side of the equilibrium
point is directed away from that point. This point is an unstable equilibrium point.
Figure 15.14 shows three conditions. The first is a stable equilibrium point (a), the second is an unstable equilibrium
point (b), and the last is also an unstable equilibrium point (c), because the force on only one side points toward the
equilibrium point.
FIGURE 15.14 Examples of equilibrium points. (a) Stable equilibrium point; (b) unstable equilibrium point; (c) unstable equilibrium point
(sometimes referred to as a half-stable equilibrium point).
The process of determining whether an equilibrium point is stable or unstable can be formalized. Consider the
potential energy curves shown in Figure 15.15. The force can be found by analyzing the slope of the graph. The force
is In (a), the fixed point is at When the force is positive. When the
force is negative. This is a stable point. In (b), the fixed point is at When the force is
negative. When the force is also negative. This is an unstable point.
Access for free at openstax.org
15.2 • Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion 721
FIGURE 15.15 Two examples of a potential energy function. The force at a position is equal to the negative of the slope of the graph at that
position. (a) A potential energy function with a stable equilibrium point. (b) A potential energy function with an unstable equilibrium point.
This point is sometimes called half-stable because the force on one side points toward the fixed point.
A practical application of the concept of stable equilibrium points is the force between two neutral atoms in a
molecule. If two molecules are in close proximity, separated by a few atomic diameters, they can experience an
attractive force. If the molecules move close enough so that the electron shells of the other electrons overlap, the
force between the molecules becomes repulsive. The attractive force between the two atoms may cause the atoms
to form a molecule. The force between the two molecules is not a linear force and cannot be modeled simply as two
masses separated by a spring, but the atoms of the molecule can oscillate around an equilibrium point when
displaced a small amount from the equilibrium position. The atoms oscillate due the attractive force and repulsive
force between the two atoms.
Consider one example of the interaction between two atoms known as the van Der Waals interaction. It is beyond
the scope of this chapter to discuss in depth the interactions of the two atoms, but the oscillations of the atoms can
be examined by considering one example of a model of the potential energy of the system. One suggestion to model
the potential energy of this molecule is with the Lennard-Jones 6-12 potential:
A graph of this function is shown in Figure 15.16. The two parameters and are found experimentally.
722 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.16 The Lennard-Jones potential energy function for a system of two neutral atoms. If the energy is below some maximum
energy, the system oscillates near the equilibrium position between the two turning points.
From the graph, you can see that there is a potential energy well, which has some similarities to the potential energy
well of the potential energy function of the simple harmonic oscillator discussed in Figure 15.13. The Lennard-Jones
potential has a stable equilibrium point where the potential energy is minimum and the force on either side of the
equilibrium point points toward equilibrium point. Note that unlike the simple harmonic oscillator, the potential well
of the Lennard-Jones potential is not symmetric. This is due to the fact that the force between the atoms is not a
Hooke’s law force and is not linear. The atoms can still oscillate around the equilibrium position because when
, the force is positive; when , the force is negative. Notice that as x approaches zero, the slope is
quite steep and negative, which means that the force is large and positive. This suggests that it takes a large force to
try to push the atoms close together. As x becomes increasingly large, the slope becomes less steep and the force is
smaller and negative. This suggests that if given a large enough energy, the atoms can be separated.
If you are interested in this interaction, find the force between the molecules by taking the derivative of the potential
energy function. You will see immediately that the force does not resemble a Hooke’s law force , but if
you are familiar with the binomial theorem:
the force can be approximated by a Hooke’s law force.
Velocity and Energy Conservation
Getting back to the system of a block and a spring in Figure 15.11, once the block is released from rest, it begins to
move in the negative direction toward the equilibrium position. The potential energy decreases and the magnitude
of the velocity and the kinetic energy increase. At time , the block reaches the equilibrium position
where the force on the block and the potential energy are zero. At the equilibrium position, the block
reaches a negative velocity with a magnitude equal to the maximum velocity . The kinetic energy is
maximum and equal to At this point, the force on the block is zero, but
momentum carries the block, and it continues in the negative direction toward . As the block continues to
move, the force on it acts in the positive direction and the magnitude of the velocity and kinetic energy decrease.
The potential energy increases as the spring compresses. At time , the block reaches . Here the
velocity and kinetic energy are equal to zero. The force on the block is and the potential energy stored in
the spring is . During the oscillations, the total energy is constant and equal to the sum of the potential
energy and the kinetic energy of the system,
Access for free at openstax.org
15.3 • Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion 723
15.12
The equation for the energy associated with SHM can be solved to find the magnitude of the velocity at any position:
15.13
The energy in a simple harmonic oscillator is proportional to the square of the amplitude. When considering many
forms of oscillations, you will find the energy proportional to the amplitude squared.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.1
Why would it hurt more if you snapped your hand with a ruler than with a loose spring, even if the displacement of
each system is equal?
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.2
Identify one way you could decrease the maximum velocity of a simple harmonic oscillator.
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how the sine and cosine functions relate to the concepts of circular motion
• Describe the connection between simple harmonic motion and circular motion
An easy way to model SHM is by considering uniform circular motion. Figure 15.17 shows one way of using this
method. A peg (a cylinder of wood) is attached to a vertical disk, rotating with a constant angular frequency. Figure
15.18 shows a side view of the disk and peg. If a lamp is placed above the disk and peg, the peg produces a shadow.
Let the disk have a radius of and define the position of the shadow that coincides with the center line of the
disk to be . As the disk rotates at a constant rate, the shadow oscillates between and .
Now imagine a block on a spring beneath the floor as shown in Figure 15.18.
724 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.17 SHM can be modeled as rotational motion by looking at the shadow of a peg on a wheel rotating at a constant angular
frequency.
Access for free at openstax.org
15.3 • Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and Circular Motion 725
FIGURE 15.18 Light shines down on the disk so that the peg makes a shadow. If the disk rotates at just the right angular frequency, the
shadow follows the motion of the block on a spring. If there is no energy dissipated due to nonconservative forces, the block and the
shadow will oscillate back and forth in unison. In this figure, four snapshots are taken at four different times. (a) The wheel starts at
and the shadow of the peg is at , representing the mass at position . (b) As the disk rotates through an angle , the
shadow of the peg is between and . (c) The disk continues to rotate until , at which the shadow follows the mass to
. (d) The disk continues to rotate, the shadow follows the position of the mass.
If the disk turns at the proper angular frequency, the shadow follows along with the block. The position of the
shadow can be modeled with the equation
15.14
Recall that the block attached to the spring does not move at a constant velocity. How often does the wheel have to
turn to have the peg’s shadow always on the block? The disk must turn at a constant angular frequency equal to
times the frequency of oscillation .
Figure 15.19 shows the basic relationship between uniform circular motion and SHM. The peg lies at the tip of the
radius, a distance Afrom the center of the disk. The x-axis is defined by a line drawn parallel to the ground, cutting
726 15 • Oscillations
the disk in half. The y-axis (not shown) is defined by a line perpendicular to the ground, cutting the disk into a left
half and a right half. The center of the disk is the point The projection of the position of the peg onto
the fixed x-axis gives the position of the shadow, which undergoes SHM analogous to the system of the block and
spring. At the time shown in the figure, the projection has position x and moves to the left with velocity v. The
tangential velocity of the peg around the circle equals of the block on the spring. The x-component of the
velocity is equal to the velocity of the block on the spring.
FIGURE 15.19 A peg moving on a circular path with a constant angular velocity the x-axis undergoes SHM. Also shown is the velocity of the peg around the circle, velocities form a similar triangle to the displacement triangle.
is undergoing uniform circular motion. Its projection on
, and its projection, which is v. Note that these
We can use Figure 15.19 to analyze the velocity of the shadow as the disk rotates. The peg moves in a circle with a
speed of . The shadow moves with a velocity equal to the component of the peg’s velocity that is parallel
to the surface where the shadow is being produced:
15.15
It follows that the acceleration is
15.16
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.3
Identify an object that undergoes uniform circular motion. Describe how you could trace the SHM of this object.
15.4 Pendulums
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the forces that act on a simple pendulum
• Determine the angular frequency, frequency, and period of a simple pendulum in terms of the length of
the pendulum and the acceleration due to gravity
• Define the period for a physical pendulum
• Define the period for a torsional pendulum
Pendulums are in common usage. Grandfather clocks use a pendulum to keep time and a pendulum can be used to
Access for free at openstax.org
15.4 • Pendulums 727
measure the acceleration due to gravity. For small displacements, a pendulum is a simple harmonic oscillator.
The Simple Pendulum
A simple pendulum is defined to have a point mass, also known as the pendulum bob, which is suspended from a
string of length Lwith negligible mass (Figure 15.20). Here, the only forces acting on the bob are the force of gravity
(i.e., the weight of the bob) and tension from the string. The mass of the string is assumed to be negligible as
compared to the mass of the bob.
FIGURE 15.20 A simple pendulum has a small-diameter bob and a string that has a very small mass but is strong enough not to stretch
appreciably. The linear displacement from equilibrium is s, the length of the arc. Also shown are the forces on the bob, which result in a net
force of toward the equilibrium position—that is, a restoring force.
Consider the torque on the pendulum. The force providing the restoring torque is the component of the weight of the
pendulum bob that acts along the arc length. The torque is the length of the string Ltimes the component of the net
force that is perpendicular to the radius of the arc. The minus sign indicates the torque acts in the opposite direction
of the angular displacement:
The solution to this differential equation involves advanced calculus, and is beyond the scope of this text. But note
that for small angles (less than 15 degrees or about 0.26 radians), and differ by less than 1%, if θ is
measured in radians. We can then use the small angle approximation The angle describes the position
of the pendulum. Using the small angle approximation gives an approximate solution for small angles,
15.17
Because this equation has the same form as the equation for SHM, the solution is easy to find. The angular
frequency is
15.18
and the period is
728 15 • Oscillations
15.19
The period of a simple pendulum depends on its length and the acceleration due to gravity. The period is completely
independent of other factors, such as mass and the maximum displacement. As with simple harmonic oscillators,
the period Tfor a pendulum is nearly independent of amplitude, especially if is less than about Even simple
pendulum clocks can be finely adjusted and remain accurate.
Note the dependence of Ton g. If the length of a pendulum is precisely known, it can actually be used to measure
the acceleration due to gravity, as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 15.3
Measuring Acceleration due to Gravity by the Period of a Pendulum
What is the acceleration due to gravity in a region where a simple pendulum having a length 75.000 cm has a period
of 1.7357 s?
Strategy
We are asked to find g given the period Tand the length Lof a pendulum. We can solve only that the angle of deflection is less than .
Solution
1. Square for g, assuming
and solve for g:
2. Substitute known values into the new equation:
3. Calculate to find g:
Significance
This method for determining g can be very accurate, which is why length and period are given to five digits in this
example. For the precision of the approximation to be better than the precision of the pendulum length
and period, the maximum displacement angle should be kept below about .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.4
An engineer builds two simple pendulums. Both are suspended from small wires secured to the ceiling of a room.
Each pendulum hovers 2 cm above the floor. Pendulum 1 has a bob with a mass of 10 kg. Pendulum 2 has a bob
with a mass of 100 kg. Describe how the motion of the pendulums will differ if the bobs are both displaced by .
Physical Pendulum
Any object can oscillate like a pendulum. Consider a coffee mug hanging on a hook in the pantry. If the mug gets
knocked, it oscillates back and forth like a pendulum until the oscillations die out. We have described a simple
pendulum as a point mass and a string. A physical pendulum is any object whose oscillations are similar to those of
the simple pendulum, but cannot be modeled as a point mass on a string, and the mass distribution must be
included into the equation of motion.
Access for free at openstax.org
15.4 • Pendulums 729
As for the simple pendulum, the restoring force of the physical pendulum is the force of gravity. With the simple
pendulum, the force of gravity acts on the center of the pendulum bob. In the case of the physical pendulum, the
force of gravity acts on the center of mass (CM) of an object. The object oscillates about a point O . Consider an
object of a generic shape as shown in Figure 15.21.
FIGURE 15.21 A physical pendulum is any object that oscillates as a pendulum, but cannot be modeled as a point mass on a string. The
force of gravity acts on the center of mass (CM) and provides the restoring force that causes the object to oscillate. The minus sign on the
component of the weight that provides the restoring force is present because the force acts in the opposite direction of the increasing angle
.
When a physical pendulum is hanging from a point but is free to rotate, it rotates because of the torque applied at
the CM, produced by the component of the object’s weight that acts tangent to the motion of the CM. Taking the
counterclockwise direction to be positive, the component of the gravitational force that acts tangent to the motion is
. The minus sign is the result of the restoring force acting in the opposite direction of the increasing angle.
Recall that the torque is equal to . The magnitude of the torque is equal to the length of the radius arm
times the tangential component of the force applied, . Here, the length Lof the radius arm is the
distance between the point of rotation and the CM. To analyze the motion, start with the net torque. Like the simple
pendulum, consider only small angles so that . Recall from Fixed-Axis Rotation on rotation that the net
torque is equal to the moment of inertia times the angular acceleration where :
Using the small angle approximation and rearranging:
constant Once again, the equation says that the second time derivative of the position (in this case, the angle) equals minus a
times the position. The solution is
where is the maximum angular displacement. The angular frequency is
15.20
The period is therefore
730 15 • Oscillations
15.21
Note that for a simple pendulum, the moment of inertia is and the period reduces to
.
EXAMPLE 15.4
Reducing the Swaying of a Skyscraper
In extreme conditions, skyscrapers can sway up to two meters with a frequency of up to 20.00 Hz due to high winds
or seismic activity. Several companies have developed physical pendulums that are placed on the top of the
skyscrapers. As the skyscraper sways to the right, the pendulum swings to the left, reducing the sway. Assuming the
oscillations have a frequency of 0.50 Hz, design a pendulum that consists of a long beam, of constant density, with a
mass of 100 metric tons and a pivot point at one end of the beam. What should be the length of the beam?
Strategy
We are asked to find the length of the physical pendulum with a known mass. We first need to find the moment of
inertia of the beam. We can then use the equation for the period of a physical pendulum to find the length.
Solution
1. Find the moment of inertia for the CM:
Use the parallel axis theorem to find the moment of inertia about the point of rotation for a rod length L :
2. The period of a physical pendulum with its center of mass a distance lfrom the pivot point has a period of
. In this problem, Lhas been defined as the total length of the rod, so . Use the moment
Access for free at openstax.org
15.4 • Pendulums 731
of inertia to solve for the length L :
Significance
There are many ways to reduce the oscillations, including modifying the shape of the skyscrapers, using multiple
physical pendulums, and using tuned-mass dampers.
Torsional Pendulum
A torsional pendulum consists of a rigid body suspended by a light wire or spring (Figure 15.22). When the body is
twisted some small maximum angle and released from rest, the body oscillates between and
. The restoring torque is supplied by the shearing of the string or wire.
FIGURE 15.22 A torsional pendulum consists of a rigid body suspended by a string or wire. The rigid body oscillates between and
.
The restoring torque can be modeled as being proportional to the angle:
The variable kappa is known as the torsion constant of the wire or string. The minus sign shows that the
restoring torque acts in the opposite direction to increasing angular displacement. The net torque is equal to the
moment of inertia times the angular acceleration:
This equation says that the second time derivative of the position (in this case, the angle) equals a negative constant
times the position. This looks very similar to the equation of motion for the SHM , where the period was
found to be . Therefore, the period of the torsional pendulum can be found using
15.22
The units for the torsion constant are and the units for the moment of inertial
are which show that the unit for the period is the second.
732 15 • Oscillations
EXAMPLE 15.5
Measuring the Torsion Constant of a String
A rod has a length of and a mass of 4.00 kg. A string is attached to the CM of the rod and the system is
hung from the ceiling (Figure 15.23). The rod is displaced 10 degrees from the equilibrium position and released
from rest. The rod oscillates with a period of 0.5 s. What is the torsion constant ?
FIGURE 15.23 (a) A rod suspended by a string from the ceiling. (b) Finding the rod’s moment of inertia.
We are asked to find the torsion constant of the string. We first need to find the moment of inertia.
Strategy
Solution
1. Find the moment of inertia for the CM:
2. Calculate the torsion constant using the equation for the period:
Significance
Like the force constant of the system of a block and a spring, the larger the torsion constant, the shorter the period.
15.5 Damped Oscillations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the motion of damped harmonic motion
• Write the equations of motion for damped harmonic oscillations
• Describe the motion of driven, or forced, damped harmonic motion
• Write the equations of motion for forced, damped harmonic motion
In the real world, oscillations seldom follow true SHM. Friction of some sort usually acts to dampen the motion so it
dies away, or needs more force to continue. In this section, we examine some examples of damped harmonic
motion and see how to modify the equations of motion to describe this more general case.
A guitar string stops oscillating a few seconds after being plucked. To keep swinging on a playground swing, you
must keep pushing (Figure 15.24). Although we can often make friction and other nonconservative forces small or
negligible, completely undamped motion is rare. In fact, we may even want to damp oscillations, such as with car
Access for free at openstax.org
15.5 • Damped Oscillations 733
shock absorbers.
FIGURE 15.24 To counteract dampening forces, you need to keep pumping a swing. (credit: Bob Mical)
Figure 15.25 shows a mass m attached to a spring with a force constant The mass is raised to a position , the
initial amplitude, and then released. The mass oscillates around the equilibrium position in a fluid with viscosity but
the amplitude decreases for each oscillation. For a system that has a small amount of damping, the period and
frequency are constant and are nearly the same as for SHM, but the amplitude gradually decreases as shown. This
occurs because the non-conservative damping force removes energy from the system, usually in the form of thermal
energy.
FIGURE 15.25 For a mass on a spring oscillating in a viscous fluid, the period remains constant, but the amplitudes of the oscillations
decrease due to the damping caused by the fluid.
Consider the forces acting on the mass. Note that the only contribution of the weight is to change the equilibrium
position, as discussed earlier in the chapter. Therefore, the net force is equal to the force of the spring and the
damping force . If the magnitude of the velocity is small, meaning the mass oscillates slowly, the damping
force is proportional to the velocity and acts against the direction of motion . The net force on the mass
is therefore
Writing this as a differential equation in x, we obtain
15.23
To determine the solution to this equation, consider the plot of position versus time shown in Figure 15.26. The
curve resembles a cosine curve oscillating in the envelope of an exponential function where solution is
. The
734 15 • Oscillations
15.24
It is left as an exercise to prove that this is, in fact, the solution. To prove that it is the right solution, take the first
and second derivatives with respect to time and substitute them into Equation 15.23. It is found that Equation
15.24 is the solution if
Recall that the angular frequency of a mass undergoing SHM is equal to the square root of the force constant divided
by the mass. This is often referred to as the natural angular frequency, which is represented as
15.25
The angular frequency for damped harmonic motion becomes
15.26
FIGURE 15.26 Position versus time for the mass oscillating on a spring in a viscous fluid. Notice that the curve appears to be a cosine
function inside an exponential envelope.
Recall that when we began this description of damped harmonic motion, we stated that the damping must be small.
Two questions come to mind. Why must the damping be small? And how small is small? If you gradually increase
the amount of damping in a system, the period and frequency begin to be affected, because damping opposes and
hence slows the back and forth motion. (The net force is smaller in both directions.) If there is very large damping,
the system does not even oscillate—it slowly moves toward equilibrium. The angular frequency is equal to
As bincreases, larger, becomes smaller and eventually reaches zero when . If bbecomes any
becomes a negative number and is a complex number.
Figure 15.27 shows the displacement of a harmonic oscillator for different amounts of damping. When the damping
constant is small, , the system oscillates while the amplitude of the motion decays exponentially. This
Access for free at openstax.org
15.6 • Forced Oscillations 735
system is said to be underdamped, as in curve (a). Many systems are underdamped, and oscillate while the
amplitude decreases exponentially, such as the mass oscillating on a spring. The damping may be quite small, but
eventually the mass comes to rest. If the damping constant is , the system is said to be critically
damped, as in curve (b). An example of a critically damped system is the shock absorbers in a car. It is
advantageous to have the oscillations decay as fast as possible. Here, the system does not oscillate, but
asymptotically approaches the equilibrium condition as quickly as possible. Curve (c) in Figure 15.27 represents an
overdamped system where An overdamped system will approach equilibrium over a longer period of
time.
FIGURE 15.27 The position versus time for three systems consisting of a mass and a spring in a viscous fluid. (a) If the damping is small
, the mass oscillates, slowly losing amplitude as the energy is dissipated by the non-conservative force(s). The limiting case
is (b) where the damping is . (c) If the damping is very large , the mass does not oscillate when displaced, but
attempts to return to the equilibrium position.
Critical damping is often desired, because such a system returns to equilibrium rapidly and remains at equilibrium
as well. In addition, a constant force applied to a critically damped system moves the system to a new equilibrium
position in the shortest time possible without overshooting or oscillating about the new position.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.5
Why are completely undamped harmonic oscillators so rare?
15.6 Forced Oscillations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define forced oscillations
• List the equations of motion associated with forced oscillations
• Explain the concept of resonance and its impact on the amplitude of an oscillator
• List the characteristics of a system oscillating in resonance
Sit in front of a piano sometime and sing a loud brief note at it with the dampers off its strings (Figure 15.28). It will
sing the same note back at you—the strings, having the same frequencies as your voice, are resonating in response
to the forces from the sound waves that you sent to them. This is a good example of the fact that objects—in this
case, piano strings—can be forced to oscillate, and oscillate most easily at their natural frequency. In this section,
we briefly explore applying a periodic driving force acting on a simple harmonic oscillator. The driving force puts
energy into the system at a certain frequency, not necessarily the same as the natural frequency of the system.
Recall that the natural frequency is the frequency at which a system would oscillate if there were no driving and no
damping force.
736 15 • Oscillations
FIGURE 15.28 You can cause the strings in a piano to vibrate simply by producing sound waves from your voice. (credit: Matt Billings)
Most of us have played with toys involving an object supported on an elastic band, something like the paddle ball
suspended from a finger in Figure 15.29. Imagine the finger in the figure is your finger. At first, you hold your finger
steady, and the ball bounces up and down with a small amount of damping. If you move your finger up and down
slowly, the ball follows along without bouncing much on its own. As you increase the frequency at which you move
your finger up and down, the ball responds by oscillating with increasing amplitude. When you drive the ball at its
natural frequency, the ball’s oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation for as long as you drive it. The
phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency equal to its natural frequency is called resonance. A system being
driven at its natural frequency is said to resonat e. As the driving frequency gets progressively higher than the
resonant or natural frequency, the amplitude of the oscillations becomes smaller until the oscillations nearly
disappear, and your finger simply moves up and down with little effect on the ball.
FIGURE 15.29 The paddle ball on its rubber band moves in response to the finger supporting it. If the finger moves with the natural
frequency of the ball on the rubber band, then a resonance is achieved, and the amplitude of the ball’s oscillations increases
dramatically. At higher and lower driving frequencies, energy is transferred to the ball less efficiently, and it responds with lower-amplitude
oscillations.
Consider a simple experiment. Attach a mass m to a spring in a viscous fluid, similar to the apparatus discussed in
the damped harmonic oscillator. This time, instead of fixing the free end of the spring, attach the free end to a disk
that is driven by a variable-speed motor. The motor turns with an angular driving frequency of . The rotating disk
provides energy to the system by the work done by the driving force . The experimental apparatus
is shown in Figure 15.30.
Access for free at openstax.org
15.6 • Forced Oscillations 737
FIGURE 15.30 Forced, damped harmonic motion produced by driving a spring and mass with a disk driven by a variable-speed motor.
Using Newton’s second law we can analyze the motion of the mass. The resulting equation is similar to
the force equation for the damped harmonic oscillator, with the addition of the driving force:
15.27
When an oscillator is forced with a periodic driving force, the motion may seem chaotic. The motions of the oscillator
is known as transients. After the transients die out, the oscillator reaches a steady state, where the motion is
periodic. After some time, the steady state solution to this differential equation is
15.28
Once again, it is left as an exercise to prove that this equation is a solution. Taking the first and second time
derivative of x(t ) and substituting them into the force equation shows that is a solution as long
as the amplitude is equal to
15.29
where is the natural frequency of the mass/spring system. Recall that the angular frequency, and
therefore the frequency, of the motor can be adjusted. Looking at the denominator of the equation for the amplitude,
when the driving frequency is much smaller, or much larger, than the natural frequency, the square of the difference
of the two angular frequencies is positive and large, making the denominator large, and the result is a
small amplitude for the oscillations of the mass. As the frequency of the driving force approaches the natural
frequency of the system, the denominator becomes small and the amplitude of the oscillations becomes large. The
maximum amplitude results when the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the system
.
Figure 15.31 shows a graph of the amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the
periodic force driving it. Each of the three curves on the graph represents a different amount of damping. All three
curves peak at the point where the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the harmonic
oscillator. The highest peak, or greatest response, is for the least amount of damping, because less energy is
removed by the damping force. Note that since the amplitude grows as the damping decreases, taking this to the
738 15 • Oscillations
limit where there is no damping , the amplitude becomes infinite.
Note that a small-amplitude driving force can produce a large-amplitude response. This phenomenon is known as
resonance. A common example of resonance is a parent pushing a small child on a swing. When the child wants to
go higher, the parent does not move back and then, getting a running start, slam into the child, applying a great force
in a short interval. Instead, the parent applies small pushes to the child at just the right frequency, and the
amplitude of the child’s swings increases.
FIGURE 15.31 Amplitude of a harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the driving force. The curves represent the same
oscillator with the same natural frequency but with different amounts of damping. Resonance occurs when the driving frequency equals the
natural frequency, and the greatest response is for the least amount of damping. The narrowest response is also for the least damping.
It is interesting to note that the widths of the resonance curves shown in Figure 15.31 depend on damping: the less
the damping, the narrower the resonance. The consequence is that if you want a driven oscillator to resonate at a
very specific frequency, you need as little damping as possible. For instance, a radio has a circuit that is used to
choose a particular radio station. In this case, the forced damped oscillator consists of a resistor, capacitor, and
inductor, which will be discussed later in this course. The circuit is “tuned” to pick a particular radio station. Here it
is desirable to have the resonance curve be very narrow, to pick out the exact frequency of the radio station chosen.
The narrowness of the graph, and the ability to pick out a certain frequency, is known as the quality of the system.
The quality, Q , is defined as the spread of the angular frequency, or equivalently, as inverse of the fractional
bandwidth, i.e., the natural frequency divided by the spread in the frequency at half the maximum amplitude
as shown in Figure 15.32. For a small damping, the quality is approximately equal to .
FIGURE 15.32 The quality of a system is defined as the spread in the frequencies at half the amplitude divided by the natural frequency.
These features of driven harmonic oscillators apply to a huge variety of systems. For instance, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is a widely used medical diagnostic tool in which atomic nuclei (mostly hydrogen nuclei or protons)
are made to resonate by incoming radio waves (on the order of 100 MHz). In all of these cases, the efficiency of
Access for free at openstax.org
15.6 • Forced Oscillations 739
energy transfer from the driving force into the oscillator is best at resonance. Figure 15.33 shows the London
Millennium Footbridge that allows pedestrians to cross the River Thames in London. This bridge was nicknamed
“Wobbly Bridge” when pedestrians experienced swaying motion while crossing it. The bridge was closed for roughly
two years to get rid of this motion.
FIGURE 15.33 Initially when people crossed the London Millennium Footbridge, they experienced a swaying motion. People continuing to
cross reinforced the oscillation’s amplitude, thereby increasing the problematic swaying. (credit: Adrian Pingstone/Wikimedia Commons)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 15.6
A famous magic trick involves a performer singing a note toward a crystal glass until the glass shatters. Explain why
the trick works in terms of resonance and natural frequency.
740 15 • Chapter Review
Chapter Review
Key Terms
amplitude (A ) maximum displacement from the
equilibrium position of an object oscillating around
the equilibrium position
critically damped condition in which the damping of
an oscillator causes it to return as quickly as
possible to its equilibrium position without
oscillating back and forth about this position
elastic potential energy potential energy stored as a
result of deformation of an elastic object, such as
the stretching of a spring
equilibrium position position where the spring is
neither stretched nor compressed
force constant (k ) characteristic of a spring which is
defined as the ratio of the force applied to the spring
to the displacement caused by the force
frequency (f ) number of events per unit of time
natural angular frequency angular frequency of a
system oscillating in SHM
oscillation single fluctuation of a quantity, or
repeated and regular fluctuations of a quantity,
between two extreme values around an equilibrium
or average value
overdamped condition in which damping of an
oscillator causes it to return to equilibrium without
oscillating; oscillator moves more slowly toward
equilibrium than in the critically damped system
period (T ) time taken to complete one oscillation
periodic motion motion that repeats itself at regular
time intervals
phase shift angle, in radians, that is used in a cosine
Key Equations
Relationship between frequency and period
General position in SHM
General velocity in SHM
General acceleration in SHM
Maximum displacement (amplitude) of SHM
Maximum velocity of SHM
Maximum acceleration of SHM
Angular frequency of a mass-spring system in SHM
Period of a mass-spring system in SHM
Frequency of a mass-spring system in SHM
Energy in a mass-spring system in SHM
The velocity of the mass in a spring-mass
system in SHM
Access for free at openstax.org
or sine function to shift the function left or right,
used to match up the function with the initial
conditions of data
physical pendulum any extended object that swings
like a pendulum
resonance large amplitude oscillations in a system
produced by a small amplitude driving force, which
has a frequency equal to the natural frequency
restoring force force acting in opposition to the force
caused by a deformation
simple harmonic motion (SHM) oscillatory motion in
a system where the restoring force is proportional to
the displacement, which acts in the direction
opposite to the displacement
simple harmonic oscillator a device that oscillates in
SHM where the restoring force is proportional to the
displacement and acts in the direction opposite to
the displacement
simple pendulum point mass, called a pendulum
bob, attached to a near massless string
stable equilibrium point point where the net force on
a system is zero, but a small displacement of the
mass will cause a restoring force that points toward
the equilibrium point
torsional pendulum any suspended object that
oscillates by twisting its suspension
underdamped condition in which damping of an
oscillator causes the amplitude of oscillations of a
damped harmonic oscillator to decrease over time,
eventually approaching zero
15 • Chapter Review 741
The x-component of the radius of a rotating disk
The x-component of the velocity of the edge of a rotating disk
The x-component of the acceleration of the
edge of a rotating disk
Force equation for a simple pendulum
Angular frequency for a simple pendulum
Period of a simple pendulum
Angular frequency of a physical pendulum
Period of a physical pendulum
Period of a torsional pendulum
Newton’s second law for harmonic motion
Solution for underdamped harmonic motion
Natural angular frequency of a
mass-spring system
Angular frequency of underdamped
harmonic motion
Newton’s second law for forced,
damped oscillation
Solution to Newton’s second law for forced,
damped oscillations
Amplitude of system undergoing forced,
damped oscillations
Summary
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
• Periodic motion is a repeating oscillation. The
time for one oscillation is the period Tand the
number of oscillations per unit time is the
frequency f . These quantities are related by
where .
• The acceleration is
.
• Simple harmonic motion (SHM) is oscillatory
motion for a system where the restoring force is
proportional to the displacement and acts in the
direction opposite to the displacement.
• Maximum displacement is the amplitude A . The
angular frequency , period T , and frequency fof
a simple harmonic oscillator are given by
, ,
where m is the mass of the system and kis the
force constant.
• Displacement as a function of time in SHM is
given by
, where .
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
• The simplest type of oscillations are related to
systems that can be described by Hooke’s law, F
= −kx, where Fis the restoring force, x is the
displacement from equilibrium or deformation,
and kis the force constant of the system.
• Elastic potential energy Ustored in the
deformation of a system that can be described by
Hooke’s law is given by
• Energy in the simple harmonic oscillator is
shared between elastic potential energy and
kinetic energy, with the total being constant:
.
• The velocity is given by
742 15 • Chapter Review
• The magnitude of the velocity as a function of
position for the simple harmonic oscillator can be
found by using
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and
Circular Motion
• A projection of uniform circular motion
undergoes simple harmonic oscillation.
• Consider a circle with a radius A , moving at a
constant angular speed . A point on the edge of
the circle moves at a constant tangential speed
of . The projection of the radius onto
the x-axis is , where is
the phase shift. The x-component of the
tangential velocity is .
15.4 Pendulums
• A mass m suspended by a wire of length Land
negligible mass is a simple pendulum and
undergoes SHM for amplitudes less than about
. The period of a simple pendulum is
, where Lis the length of the string
and g is the acceleration due to gravity.
• The period of a physical pendulum
can be found if the moment of
inertia is known. The length between the point of
Conceptual Questions
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
1. What conditions must be met to produce SHM?
2. (a) If frequency is not constant for some
oscillation, can the oscillation be SHM? (b) Can
you think of any examples of harmonic motion
where the frequency may depend on the
amplitude?
Give an example of a simple harmonic oscillator,
specifically noting how its frequency is
independent of amplitude.
Explain why you expect an object made of a stiff
material to vibrate at a higher frequency than a
similar object made of a more pliable material.
As you pass a freight truck with a trailer on a
highway, you notice that its trailer is bouncing up
and down slowly. Is it more likely that the trailer
is heavily loaded or nearly empty? Explain your
answer.
3. 4. 5. Access for free at openstax.org
rotation and the center of mass is L .
• The period of a torsional pendulum
can be found if the moment of inertia and torsion
constant are known.
15.5 Damped Oscillations
• Damped harmonic oscillators have non-
conservative forces that dissipate their energy.
• Critical damping returns the system to
equilibrium as fast as possible without
overshooting.
• An underdamped system will oscillate through
the equilibrium position.
• An overdamped system moves more slowly
toward equilibrium than one that is critically
damped.
15.6 Forced Oscillations
• A system’s natural frequency is the frequency at
which the system oscillates if not affected by
driving or damping forces.
• A periodic force driving a harmonic oscillator at
its natural frequency produces resonance. The
system is said to resonate.
• The less damping a system has, the higher the
amplitude of the forced oscillations near
resonance. The more damping a system has, the
broader response it has to varying driving
frequencies.
6. Some people modify cars to be much closer to
the ground than when manufactured. Should
they install stiffer springs? Explain your answer.
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
7. 8. Describe a system in which elastic potential
energy is stored.
Explain in terms of energy how dissipative forces
such as friction reduce the amplitude of a
harmonic oscillator. Also explain how a driving
mechanism can compensate. (A pendulum clock
is such a system.)
The temperature of the atmosphere oscillates
from a maximum near noontime and a minimum
near sunrise. Would you consider the
atmosphere to be in stable or unstable
equilibrium?
9. 
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and
Circular Motion
10. 11. Can this analogy of SHM to circular motion be
carried out with an object oscillating on a spring
vertically hung from the ceiling? Why or why not?
If given the choice, would you prefer to use a
sine function or a cosine function to model the
motion?
If the maximum speed of the mass attached to a
spring, oscillating on a frictionless table, was
increased, what characteristics of the rotating
disk would need to be changed?
15.4 Pendulums
12. 13. 14. Pendulum clocks are made to run at the correct
rate by adjusting the pendulum’s length.
Suppose you move from one city to another
where the acceleration due to gravity is slightly
greater, taking your pendulum clock with you,
will you have to lengthen or shorten the
pendulum to keep the correct time, other factors
remaining constant? Explain your answer.
A pendulum clock works by measuring the
period of a pendulum. In the springtime the
clock runs with perfect time, but in the summer
and winter the length of the pendulum changes.
When most materials are heated, they expand.
Does the clock run too fast or too slow in the
summer? What about the winter?
With the use of a phase shift, the position of an
object may be modeled as a cosine or sine
function. If given the option, which function
would you choose? Assuming that the phase
shift is zero, what are the initial conditions of
Problems
15.1 Simple Harmonic Motion
21. Prove that using will
produce the same results for the period for the
oscillations of a mass and a spring. Why do you
think the cosine function was chosen?
What is the period of 60.0 Hz of electrical
power?
If your heart rate is 150 beats per minute during
strenuous exercise, what is the time per beat in
units of seconds?
Find the frequency of a tuning fork that takes
to complete one oscillation.
22. 23. 24. 15 • Chapter Review 743
function; that is, the initial position, velocity, and
acceleration, when using a sine function? How
about when a cosine function is used?
15.5 Damped Oscillations
15. 16. 17. Give an example of a damped harmonic
oscillator. (They are more common than
undamped or simple harmonic oscillators.)
How would a car bounce after a bump under
each of these conditions?
(a) overdamping
(b) underdamping
(c) critical damping
Most harmonic oscillators are damped and, if
undriven, eventually come to a stop. Why?
15.6 Forced Oscillations
18. 19. 20. Why are soldiers in general ordered to “route
step” (walk out of step) across a bridge?
Do you think there is any harmonic motion in the
physical world that is not damped harmonic
motion? Try to make a list of five examples of
undamped harmonic motion and damped
harmonic motion. Which list was easier to make?
Some engineers use sound to diagnose
performance problems with car engines.
Occasionally, a part of the engine is designed
that resonates at the frequency of the engine.
The unwanted oscillations can cause noise that
irritates the driver or could lead to the part
failing prematurely. In one case, a part was
located that had a length Lmade of a material
with a mass M . What can be done to correct this
problem?
25. 26. 27. A stroboscope is set to flash every
. What is the frequency of the
flashes?
A tire has a tread pattern with a crevice every
2.00 cm. Each crevice makes a single vibration
as the tire moves. What is the frequency of these
vibrations if the car moves at 30.0 m/s?
Each piston of an engine makes a sharp sound
every other revolution of the engine. (a) How fast
is a race car going if its eight-cylinder engine
emits a sound of frequency 750 Hz, given that
the engine makes 2000 revolutions per
kilometer? (b) At how many revolutions per
minute is the engine rotating?
744 15 • Chapter Review
28. 29. 30. 31. A type of cuckoo clock keeps time by having a
mass bouncing on a spring, usually something
cute like a cherub in a chair. What force constant
is needed to produce a period of 0.500 s for a
0.0150-kg mass?
A mass is attached to a spring and hung
vertically. The mass is raised a short distance in
the vertical direction and released. The mass
oscillates with a frequency . If the mass is
replaced with a mass nine times as large, and
the experiment was repeated, what would be
the frequency of the oscillations in terms of ?
A 0.500-kg mass suspended from a spring
oscillates with a period of 1.50 s. How much
mass must be added to the object to change the
period to 2.00 s?
How much leeway (both percentage and mass)
would you have in the selection of the mass of
the object in the previous problem if you did not
wish the new period to be greater than 2.01 s or
less than 1.99 s?
15.2 Energy in Simple Harmonic Motion
32. Fish are hung on a spring scale to determine
their mass. (a) What is the force constant of the
spring in such a scale if it the spring stretches
8.00 cm for a 10.0 kg load? (b) What is the mass
of a fish that stretches the spring 5.50 cm? (c)
How far apart are the half-kilogram marks on the
scale?
It is weigh-in time for the local under-85-kg
rugby team. The bathroom scale used to assess
eligibility can be described by Hooke’s law and is
depressed 0.75 cm by its maximum load of 120
kg. (a) What is the spring’s effective force
constant? (b) A player stands on the scales and
depresses it by 0.48 cm. Is he eligible to play on
this under-85-kg team?
One type of BB gun uses a spring-driven plunger
to blow the BB from its barrel. (a) Calculate the
force constant of its plunger’s spring if you must
compress it 0.150 m to drive the 0.0500-kg
plunger to a top speed of 20.0 m/s. (b) What
force must be exerted to compress the spring?
When an 80.0-kg man stands on a pogo stick,
the spring is compressed 0.120 m. (a) What is
the force constant of the spring? (b) Will the
spring be compressed more when he hops down
the road?
A spring has a length of 0.200 m when a
33. 34. 35. 36. Access for free at openstax.org
37. 0.300-kg mass hangs from it, and a length of
0.750 m when a 1.95-kg mass hangs from it. (a)
What is the force constant of the spring? (b)
What is the unloaded length of the spring?
The length of nylon rope from which a mountain
climber is suspended has an effective force
constant of . (a) What is the
frequency at which he bounces, given his mass
plus and the mass of his equipment are 90.0 kg?
(b) How much would this rope stretch to break
the climber’s fall if he free-falls 2.00 m before
the rope runs out of slack? (Hint: Use
conservation of energy.) (c) Repeat both parts of
this problem in the situation where twice this
length of nylon rope is used.
15.3 Comparing Simple Harmonic Motion and
Circular Motion
38. 39. 40. The motion of a mass on a spring hung vertically,
where the mass oscillates up and down, can also
be modeled using the rotating disk. Instead of
the lights being placed horizontally along the top
and pointing down, place the lights vertically and
have the lights shine on the side of the rotating
disk. A shadow will be produced on a nearby
wall, and will move up and down. Write the
equations of motion for the shadow taking the
position at to be with the
mass moving in the positive y-direction.
(a) A novelty clock has a 0.0100-kg-mass object
bouncing on a spring that has a force constant of
1.25 N/m. What is the maximum velocity of the
object if the object bounces 3.00 cm above and
below its equilibrium position? (b) How many
joules of kinetic energy does the object have at
its maximum velocity?
Reciprocating motion uses the rotation of a motor to
produce linear motion up and down or back and
forth. This is how a reciprocating saw operates, as
shown below.
41. If the motor rotates at 60 Hz and has a radius of 3.0
cm, estimate the maximum speed of the saw blade
as it moves left and right. This design is known as a
scotch yoke.
A student stands on the edge of a merry-go-
15 • Chapter Review 745
round which rotates five times a minute and has
a radius of two meters one evening as the sun is
setting. The student produces a shadow on the
nearby building. (a) Write an equation for the
position of the shadow. (b) Write an equation for
the velocity of the shadow.
15.4 Pendulums
42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. What is the length of a pendulum that has a
period of 0.500 s?
Some people think a pendulum with a period of
1.00 s can be driven with “mental energy” or
psycho kinetically, because its period is the
same as an average heartbeat. True or not, what
is the length of such a pendulum?
What is the period of a 1.00-m-long pendulum?
How long does it take a child on a swing to
complete one swing if her center of gravity is
4.00 m below the pivot?
The pendulum on a cuckoo clock is 5.00-cm
long. What is its frequency?
Two parakeets sit on a swing with their
combined CMs 10.0 cm below the pivot. At what
frequency do they swing?
(a) A pendulum that has a period of 3.00000 s
and that is located where the acceleration due to
gravity is is moved to a location where
the acceleration due to gravity is .
What is its new period? (b) Explain why so many
digits are needed in the value for the period,
based on the relation between the period and
the acceleration due to gravity.
A pendulum with a period of 2.00000 s in one
location ( ) is moved to a new
location where the period is now 1.99796 s.
What is the acceleration due to gravity at its new
location?
(a) What is the effect on the period of a
pendulum if you double its length? (b) What is
the effect on the period of a pendulum if you
Additional Problems
56. Suppose you attach an object with mass m to a
vertical spring originally at rest, and let it bounce
up and down. You release the object from rest at
the spring’s original rest length, the length of the
spring in equilibrium, without the mass
attached. The amplitude of the motion is the
distance between the equilibrium position of the
52. 53. 54. decrease its length by 5.00%?
15.5 Damped Oscillations
51. The amplitude of a lightly damped oscillator
decreases by during each cycle. What
percentage of the mechanical energy of the
oscillator is lost in each cycle?
15.6 Forced Oscillations
How much energy must the shock absorbers of a
1200-kg car dissipate in order to damp a bounce
that initially has a velocity of 0.800 m/s at the
equilibrium position? Assume the car returns to
its original vertical position.
If a car has a suspension system with a force
constant of , how much energy
must the car’s shocks remove to dampen an
oscillation starting with a maximum
displacement of 0.0750 m?
(a) How much will a spring that has a force
constant of 40.0 N/m be stretched by an object
with a mass of 0.500 kg when hung motionless
from the spring? (b) Calculate the decrease in
gravitational potential energy of the 0.500-kg
object when it descends this distance. (c) Part of
this gravitational energy goes into the spring.
Calculate the energy stored in the spring by this
stretch, and compare it with the gravitational
potential energy. Explain where the rest of the
energy might go.
Suppose you have a 0.750-kg object on a
horizontal surface connected to a spring that has
a force constant of 150 N/m. There is simple
friction between the object and surface with a
static coefficient of friction . (a) How
far can the spring be stretched without moving
the mass? (b) If the object is set into oscillation
with an amplitude twice the distance found in
part (a), and the kinetic coefficient of friction is
, what total distance does it travel
before stopping? Assume it starts at the
maximum amplitude.
55. spring without the mass attached and the
equilibrium position of the spring with the mass
attached. (a) Show that the spring exerts an
upward force of 2.00mg on the object at its
lowest point. (b) If the spring has a force
constant of 10.0 N/m, is hung horizontally, and
the position of the free end of the spring is
746 15 • Chapter Review
57. 58. 59. marked as , where is the new
equilibrium position if a 0.25-kg-mass object is
hung from the spring? (c) If the spring has a
force constant of 10.0 N/m and a 0.25-kg-mass
object is set in motion as described, find the
amplitude of the oscillations. (d) Find the
maximum velocity.
A diver on a diving board is undergoing SHM. Her
mass is 55.0 kg and the period of her motion is
0.800 s. The next diver's period of simple
harmonic oscillation is 1.05 s. What is the
second diver's mass if the mass of the board is
negligible?
Suppose a diving board with no one on it
bounces up and down in a SHM with a frequency
of 4.00 Hz. The board has an effective mass of
10.0 kg. What is the frequency of the SHM of a
75.0-kg diver on the board?
The device pictured in the following figure
entertains infants while keeping them from
wandering. The child bounces in a harness
suspended from a door frame by a spring. (a) If
the spring stretches 0.250 m while supporting
an 8.0-kg child, what is its force constant? (b)
What is the time for one complete bounce of this
child? (c) What is the child’s maximum velocity if
the amplitude of her bounce is 0.200 m?
60. FIGURE 15.34 (credit: Lisa Doehnert)
A mass is placed on a frictionless, horizontal
table. A spring , which can be
stretched or compressed, is placed on the table.
A 5.00-kg mass is attached to one end of the
spring, the other end is anchored to the wall.
The equilibrium position is marked at zero. A
student moves the mass out to and
Access for free at openstax.org
61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. releases it from rest. The mass oscillates in
SHM. (a) Determine the equations of motion. (b)
Find the position, velocity, and acceleration of
the mass at time
Find the ratio of the new/old periods of a
pendulum if the pendulum were transported
from Earth to the Moon, where the acceleration
due to gravity is .
At what rate will a pendulum clock run on the
Moon, where the acceleration due to gravity is
, if it keeps time accurately on Earth?
That is, find the time (in hours) it takes the
clock’s hour hand to make one revolution on the
Moon.
If a pendulum-driven clock gains 5.00 s/day,
what fractional change in pendulum length must
be made for it to keep perfect time?
A 2.00-kg object hangs, at rest, on a 1.00-m-
long string attached to the ceiling. A 100-g mass
is fired with a speed of 20 m/s at the 2.00-kg
mass, and the 100.00-g mass collides perfectly
elastically with the 2.00-kg mass. Write an
equation for the motion of the hanging mass
after the collision. Assume air resistance is
negligible.
A 2.00-kg object hangs, at rest, on a 1.00-m-
long string attached to the ceiling. A 100-g
object is fired with a speed of 20 m/s at the
2.00-kg object, and the two objects collide and
stick together in a totally inelastic collision.
Write an equation for the motion of the system
after the collision. Assume air resistance is
negligible.
Assume that a pendulum used to drive a
grandfather clock has a length and
a mass Mat temperature It can
be modeled as a physical pendulum as a rod
oscillating around one end. By what percentage
will the period change if the temperature
increases by Assume the length of the
rod changes linearly with temperature, where
and the rod is made of brass
A 2.00-kg block lies at rest on a frictionless
table. A spring, with a spring constant of 100
N/m is attached to the wall and to the block. A
second block of 0.50 kg is placed on top of the
first block. The 2.00-kg block is gently pulled to
a position and released from rest. There
is a coefficient of friction of 0.45 between the
two blocks. (a) What is the period of the
oscillations? (b) What is the largest amplitude of
Challenge Problems
68. 69. 70. A suspension bridge oscillates with an effective
force constant of . (a) How
much energy is needed to make it oscillate with
an amplitude of 0.100 m? (b) If soldiers march
across the bridge with a cadence equal to the
bridge’s natural frequency and impart
of energy each second, how long
does it take for the bridge’s oscillations to go
from 0.100 m to 0.500 m amplitude.
Near the top of the Citigroup Center building in
New York City, there is an object with mass of
on springs that have adjustable
force constants. Its function is to dampen wind-
driven oscillations of the building by oscillating
at the same frequency as the building is being
driven—the driving force is transferred to the
object, which oscillates instead of the entire
building. (a) What effective force constant
should the springs have to make the object
oscillate with a period of 2.00 s? (b) What energy
is stored in the springs for a 2.00-m
displacement from equilibrium?
Parcels of air (small volumes of air) in a stable
atmosphere (where the temperature increases
with height) can oscillate up and down, due to
the restoring force provided by the buoyancy of
the air parcel. The frequency of the oscillations
are a measure of the stability of the atmosphere.
Assuming that the acceleration of an air parcel
can be modeled as , prove
71. 72. 73. 15 • Chapter Review 747
motion that will allow the blocks to oscillate
without the 0.50-kg block sliding off?
that is a solution, where Nis
known as the Brunt-Väisälä frequency. Note that
in a stable atmosphere, the density decreases
with height and parcel oscillates up and down.
Consider the van der Waals potential
, used to model
the potential energy function of two molecules, where
the minimum potential is at . Find the force as
a function of r. Consider a small displacement
and use the binomial theorem:
,
to show that the force does approximate a Hooke’s
law force.
Suppose the length of a clock’s pendulum is
changed by 1.000%, exactly at noon one day.
What time will the clock read 24.00 hours later,
assuming it the pendulum has kept perfect time
before the change? Note that there are two
answers, and perform the calculation to four-
digit precision.
(a) The springs of a pickup truck act like a single
spring with a force constant of .
By how much will the truck be depressed by its
maximum load of 1000 kg? (b) If the pickup
truck has four identical springs, what is the force
constant of each?
748 15 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 16
Waves
FIGURE 16.1 From the world of renewable energy sources comes the electric power-generating buoy. Although there are many versions,
this one converts the up-and-down motion, as well as side-to-side motion, of the buoy into rotational motion in order to turn an electric
generator, which stores the energy in batteries.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1 Traveling Waves
16.2 Mathematics of Waves
16.3 Wave Speed on a Stretched String
16.4 Energy and Power of a Wave
16.5 Interference of Waves
16.6 Standing Waves and Resonance
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we study the physics of wave motion. We concentrate on mechanical waves, which
are disturbances that move through a medium such as air or water. Like simple harmonic motion studied in the
preceding chapter, the energy transferred through the medium is proportional to the amplitude squared. Surface
water waves in the ocean are transverse waves in which the energy of the wave travels horizontally while the water
oscillates up and down due to some restoring force. In the picture above, a buoy is used to convert the awesome
power of ocean waves into electricity. The up-and-down motion of the buoy generated as the waves pass is
converted into rotational motion that turns a rotor in an electric generator. The generator charges batteries, which
are in turn used to provide a consistent energy source for the end user. This model was successfully tested by the US
Navy in a project to provide power to coastal security networks and was able to provide an average power of 350 W.
The buoy survived the difficult ocean environment, including operation off the New Jersey coast through Hurricane
Irene in 2011.
The concepts presented in this chapter will be the foundation for many interesting topics, from the transmission of
information to the concepts of quantum mechanics.
750 16 • Waves
16.1 Traveling Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the basic characteristics of wave motion
• Define the terms wavelength, amplitude, period, frequency, and wave speed
• Explain the difference between longitudinal and transverse waves, and give examples of each type
• List the different types of waves
We saw in Oscillations that oscillatory motion is an important type of behavior that can be used to model a wide
range of physical phenomena. Oscillatory motion is also important because oscillations can generate waves, which
are of fundamental importance in physics. Many of the terms and equations we studied in the chapter on oscillations
apply equally well to wave motion (Figure 16.2).
FIGURE 16.2 An ocean wave is probably the first picture that comes to mind when you hear the word “wave.” Although this breaking wave,
and ocean waves in general, have apparent similarities to the basic wave characteristics we will discuss, the mechanisms driving ocean
waves are highly complex and beyond the scope of this chapter. It may seem natural, and even advantageous, to apply the concepts in this
chapter to ocean waves, but ocean waves are nonlinear, and the simple models presented in this chapter do not fully explain them. (credit:
Steve Jurvetson)
Types of Waves
A wave is a disturbance that propagates, or moves from the place it was created. There are three basic types of
waves: mechanical waves, electromagnetic waves, and matter waves.
Basic mechanical waves are governed by Newton’s laws and require a medium. A medium is the substance
mechanical waves propagate through, and the medium produces an elastic restoring force when it is deformed.
Mechanical waves transfer energy and momentum, without transferring mass. Some examples of mechanical waves
are water waves, sound waves, and seismic waves. The medium for water waves is water; for sound waves, the
medium is usually air. (Sound waves can travel in other media as well; we will look at that in more detail in Sound.)
For surface water waves, the disturbance occurs on the surface of the water, perhaps created by a rock thrown into
a pond or by a swimmer splashing the surface repeatedly. For sound waves, the disturbance is a change in air
pressure, perhaps created by the oscillating cone inside a speaker or a vibrating tuning fork. In both cases, the
disturbance is the oscillation of the molecules of the fluid. In mechanical waves, energy and momentum transfer
with the motion of the wave, whereas the mass oscillates around an equilibrium point. (We discuss this in Energy
and Power of a Wave.) Earthquakes generate seismic waves from several types of disturbances, including the
disturbance of Earth’s surface and pressure disturbances under the surface. Seismic waves travel through the solids
and liquids that form Earth. In this chapter, we focus on mechanical waves.
Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 • Traveling Waves 751
Electromagnetic waves are associated with oscillations in electric and magnetic fields and do not require a medium.
Examples include gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet waves, visible light, infrared waves, microwaves, and radio waves.
Electromagnetic waves can travel through a vacuum at the speed of light, For
example, light from distant stars travels through the vacuum of space and reaches Earth. Electromagnetic waves
have some characteristics that are similar to mechanical waves; they are covered in more detail in Electromagnetic
Waves (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-2/pages/16-introduction).
Mat t er waves are a central part of the branch of physics known as quantum mechanics. These waves are associated
with protons, electrons, neutrons, and other fundamental particles found in nature. The theory that all types of
matter have wave-like properties was first proposed by Louis de Broglie in 1924. Matter waves are discussed in
Photons and Matter Waves (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/6-introduction).
Mechanical Waves
Mechanical waves exhibit characteristics common to all waves, such as amplitude, wavelength, period, frequency,
and energy. All wave characteristics can be described by a small set of underlying principles.
The simplest mechanical waves repeat themselves for several cycles and are associated with simple harmonic
motion. These simple harmonic waves can be modeled using some combination of sine and cosine functions. For
example, consider the simplified surface water wave that moves across the surface of water as illustrated in Figure
16.3. Unlike complex ocean waves, in surface water waves, the medium, in this case water, moves vertically,
oscillating up and down, whereas the disturbance of the wave moves horizontally through the medium. In Figure
16.3, the waves causes a seagull to move up and down in simple harmonic motion as the wave crests and troughs
(peaks and valleys) pass under the bird. The crest is the highest point of the wave, and the trough is the lowest part
of the wave. The time for one complete oscillation of the up-and-down motion is the wave’s period T . The wave’s
frequency is the number of waves that pass through a point per unit time and is equal to The period can be
expressed using any convenient unit of time but is usually measured in seconds; frequency is usually measured in
hertz (Hz), where
The length of the wave is called the wavelength and is represented by the Greek letter lambda , which is
measured in any convenient unit of length, such as a centimeter or meter. The wavelength can be measured
between any two similar points along the medium that have the same height and the same slope. In Figure 16.3, the
wavelength is shown measured between two crests. As stated above, the period of the wave is equal to the time for
one oscillation, but it is also equal to the time for one wavelength to pass through a point along the wave’s path.
The amplitude of the wave (A ) is a measure of the maximum displacement of the medium from its equilibrium
position. In the figure, the equilibrium position is indicated by the dotted line, which is the height of the water if
there were no waves moving through it. In this case, the wave is symmetrical, the crest of the wave is a distance
above the equilibrium position, and the trough is a distance below the equilibrium position. The units for the
amplitude can be centimeters or meters, or any convenient unit of distance.
FIGURE 16.3 An idealized surface water wave passes under a seagull that bobs up and down in simple harmonic motion. The wave has a
752 16 • Waves
wavelength , which is the distance between adjacent identical parts of the wave. The amplitude Aof the wave is the maximum
displacement of the wave from the equilibrium position, which is indicated by the dotted line. In this example, the medium moves up and
down, whereas the disturbance of the surface propagates parallel to the surface at a speed v.
The water wave in the figure moves through the medium with a propagation velocity The magnitude of the wave
velocity is the distance the wave travels in a given time, which is one wavelength in the time of one period, and the
wave speed is the magnitude of wave velocity. In equation form, this is
16.1
This fundamental relationship holds for all types of waves. For water waves, v is the speed of a surface wave; for
sound, v is the speed of sound; and for visible light, v is the speed of light.
Transverse and Longitudinal Waves
We have seen that a simple mechanical wave consists of a periodic disturbance that propagates from one place to
another through a medium. In Figure 16.4(a), the wave propagates in the horizontal direction, whereas the medium
is disturbed in the vertical direction. Such a wave is called a transverse wave. In a transverse wave, the wave may
propagate in any direction, but the disturbance of the medium is perpendicular to the direction of propagation. In
contrast, in a longitudinal wave or compressional wave, the disturbance is parallel to the direction of propagation.
Figure 16.4(b) shows an example of a longitudinal wave. The size of the disturbance is its amplitude Aand is
completely independent of the speed of propagation v.
FIGURE 16.4 (a) In a transverse wave, the medium oscillates perpendicular to the wave velocity. Here, the spring moves vertically up and
down, while the wave propagates horizontally to the right. (b) In a longitudinal wave, the medium oscillates parallel to the propagation of
the wave. In this case, the spring oscillates back and forth, while the wave propagates to the right.
A simple graphical representation of a section of the spring shown in Figure 16.4(b) is shown in Figure 16.5. Figure
16.5(a) shows the equilibrium position of the spring before any waves move down it. A point on the spring is marked
with a blue dot. Figure 16.5(b) through (g) show snapshots of the spring taken one-quarter of a period apart,
sometime after the end of` the spring is oscillated back and forth in the x-direction at a constant frequency. The
disturbance of the wave is seen as the compressions and the expansions of the spring. Note that the blue dot
oscillates around its equilibrium position a distance A , as the longitudinal wave moves in the positive x-direction
with a constant speed. The distance Ais the amplitude of the wave. The y-position of the dot does not change as the
wave moves through the spring. The wavelength of the wave is measured in part (d). The wavelength depends on
the speed of the wave and the frequency of the driving force.
Access for free at openstax.org
16.1 • Traveling Waves 753
FIGURE 16.5 (a) This is a simple, graphical representation of a section of the stretched spring shown in Figure 16.4(b), representing the
spring’s equilibrium position before any waves are induced on the spring. A point on the spring is marked by a blue dot. (b–g) Longitudinal
waves are created by oscillating the end of the spring (not shown) back and forth along the x-axis. The longitudinal wave, with a wavelength
, moves along the spring in the +x-direction with a wave speed v. For convenience, the wavelength is measured in (d). Note that the point
on the spring that was marked with the blue dot moves back and forth a distance Afrom the equilibrium position, oscillating around the
equilibrium position of the point.
Waves may be transverse, longitudinal, or a combination of the two. Examples of transverse waves are the waves on
stringed instruments or surface waves on water, such as ripples moving on a pond. Sound waves in air and water are
longitudinal. With sound waves, the disturbances are periodic variations in pressure that are transmitted in fluids.
Fluids do not have appreciable shear strength, and for this reason, the sound waves in them are longitudinal waves.
Sound in solids can have both longitudinal and transverse components, such as those in a seismic wave.
Earthquakes generate seismic waves under Earth’s surface with both longitudinal and transverse components
(called compressional or P-waves and shear or S-waves, respectively). The components of seismic waves have
important individual characteristics—they propagate at different speeds, for example. Earthquakes also have
surface waves that are similar to surface waves on water. Ocean waves also have both transverse and longitudinal
components.
EXAMPLE 16.1
Wave on a String
A student takes a 30.00-m-long string and attaches one end to the wall in the physics lab. The student then holds
the free end of the rope, keeping the tension constant in the rope. The student then begins to send waves down the
string by moving the end of the string up and down with a frequency of 2.00 Hz. The maximum displacement of the
end of the string is 20.00 cm. The first wave hits the lab wall 6.00 s after it was created. (a) What is the speed of the
wave? (b) What is the period of the wave? (c) What is the wavelength of the wave?
Strategy
a. b. c. The speed of the wave can be derived by dividing the distance traveled by the time.
The period of the wave is the inverse of the frequency of the driving force.
The wavelength can be found from the speed and the period
754 16 • Waves
Solution
a. The first wave traveled 30.00 m in 6.00 s:
b. The period is equal to the inverse of the frequency:
c. The wavelength is equal to the velocity times the period:
Significance
The frequency of the wave produced by an oscillating driving force is equal to the frequency of the driving force.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.1
When a guitar string is plucked, the guitar string oscillates as a result of waves moving through the string. The
vibrations of the string cause the air molecules to oscillate, forming sound waves. The frequency of the sound waves
is equal to the frequency of the vibrating string. Is the wavelength of the sound wave always equal to the wavelength
of the waves on the string?
EXAMPLE 16.2
Characteristics of a Wave
A transverse mechanical wave propagates in the positive x-direction through a spring (as shown in Figure 16.4(a))
with a constant wave speed, and the medium oscillates between and around an equilibrium position. The
graph in Figure 16.6 shows the height of the spring (y) versus the position (x), where the x-axis points in the
direction of propagation. The figure shows the height of the spring versus the x-position at as a dotted
line and the wave at as a solid line. Assume the wave has not traveled more than 1 wavelength in this
time. (a) Determine the wavelength and amplitude of the wave. (b) Find the propagation velocity of the wave. (c)
Calculate the period and frequency of the wave.
FIGURE 16.6 A transverse wave shown at two instants of time.
Strategy
a. b. The amplitude and wavelength can be determined from the graph.
Since the velocity is constant, the velocity of the wave can be found by dividing the distance traveled by the
Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 755
wave by the time it took the wave to travel the distance.
The period can be found from and the frequency from
c. Solution
a. Read the wavelength from the graph, looking at the purple arrow in Figure 16.7. Read the amplitude by
looking at the green arrow. The wavelength is and the amplitude is
b. FIGURE 16.7 Characteristics of the wave marked on a graph of its displacement.
The distance the wave traveled from time to time red arrow, which shows the distance the crest has moved in 3 s. The distance is
The velocity is
can be seen in the graph. Consider the
and the frequency is
c. The period is Significance
Note that the wavelength can be found using any two successive identical points that repeat, having the same height
and slope. You should choose two points that are most convenient. The displacement can also be found using any
convenient point.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.2
The propagation velocity of a transverse or longitudinal mechanical wave may be constant as the wave disturbance
moves through the medium. Consider a transverse mechanical wave: Is the velocity of the medium also constant?
16.2 Mathematics of Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Model a wave, moving with a constant wave velocity, with a mathematical expression
• Calculate the velocity and acceleration of the medium
• Show how the velocity of the medium differs from the wave velocity (propagation velocity)
In the previous section, we described periodic waves by their characteristics of wavelength, period, amplitude, and
wave speed of the wave. Waves can also be described by the motion of the particles of the medium through which
the waves move. The position of particles of the medium can be mathematically modeled as wave functions, which
can be used to find the position, velocity, and acceleration of the particles of the medium of the wave at any time.
756 16 • Waves
Pulses
A pulse can be described as wave consisting of a single disturbance that moves through the medium with a constant
amplitude. The pulse moves as a pattern that maintains its shape as it propagates with a constant wave speed.
Because the wave speed is constant, the distance the pulse moves in a time is equal to (Figure 16.8).
FIGURE 16.8 The pulse at time is centered on with amplitude A . The pulse moves as a pattern with a constant shape, with a
constant maximum value A . The velocity is constant and the pulse moves a distance in a time The distance traveled is
measured with any convenient point on the pulse. In this figure, the crest is used.
Modeling a One-Dimensional Sinusoidal Wave using a Wave Function
Consider a string kept at a constant tension where one end is fixed and the free end is oscillated between
and by a mechanical device at a constant frequency. Figure 16.9 shows snapshots of the wave at
an interval of an eighth of a period, beginning after one period
Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 757
FIGURE 16.9 Snapshots of a transverse wave moving through a string under tension, beginning at time and taken at intervals of
Colored dots are used to highlight points on the string. Points that are a wavelength apart in the x-direction are highlighted with the same
color dots.
Notice that each select point on the string (marked by colored dots) oscillates up and down in simple harmonic
and motion, between positive x-direction as time progresses.
with a period T . The wave on the string is sinusoidal and is translating in the
At this point, it is useful to recall from your study of algebra that if f (x) is some function, then is the same
function translated in the positive x-direction by a distance d . The function is the same function translated
in the negative x-direction by a distance d . We want to define a wave function that will give the y-position of each
segment of the string for every position x along the string for every time t .
Looking at the first snapshot in Figure 16.9, the y-position of the string between and a sine function. This wave propagates down the string one wavelength in one period, as seen in the last snapshot.
The wave therefore moves with a constant wave speed of
Recall that a sine function is a function of the angle , oscillating between and radians (Figure 16.10). However, the y-position of the medium, or the wave function, oscillates between , and repeats every wavelength .
and
can be modeled as
, and repeating every
758 16 • Waves
FIGURE 16.10 A sine function oscillates between and every radians.
To construct our model of the wave using a periodic function, consider the ratio of the angle and the position,
Using as a function of the position x:
and multiplying the sine function by the amplitude A , we can now model the y-position of the string
The wave on the string travels in the positive x-direction with a constant velocity v, and moves a distance vtin a time
t . The wave function can now be defined by
It is often convenient to rewrite this wave function in a more compact form. Multiplying through by the ratio
leads to the equation
The value is defined as the wave number. The symbol for the wave number is kand has units of inverse meters,
16.2
Recall from Oscillations that the angular frequency is defined as becomes
The second term of the wave function
The wave function for a simple harmonic wave on a string reduces to
where Ais the amplitude, is the wave number, is the angular frequency, the minus sign is for waves
moving in the positive x-direction, and the plus sign is for waves moving in the negative x-direction. The velocity of
the wave is equal to
16.3
Think back to our discussion of a mass on a spring, when the position of the mass was modeled as
The angle is a phase shift, added to allow for the fact that the mass may have initial
Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 759
conditions other than and For similar reasons, the initial phase is added to the wave function. The
wave function modeling a sinusoidal wave, allowing for an initial phase shift is
16.4
The value
16.5
, that is, when is known as the phase of the wave, where is the initial phase of the wave function. Whether the temporal term
is negative or positive depends on the direction of the wave. First consider the minus sign for a wave with an initial
phase equal to zero The phase of the wave would be Consider following a point on a wave,
such as a crest. A crest will occur when for any integral
value of n. For instance, one particular crest occurs at As the wave moves, time increases and x must
also increase to keep the phase equal to Therefore, the minus sign is for a wave moving in the positive
x-direction. Using the plus sign, As time increases, x must decrease to keep the phase equal to
The plus sign is used for waves moving in the negative x-direction. In summary,
models a wave moving in the positive x-direction and negative x-direction.
Equation 16.4 is known as a simple harmonic wave function. A wave function is any function such that
Later in this chapter, we will see that it is a solution to the linear wave equation. Note that
works equally well because it corresponds to a different phase shift
models a wave moving in the
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY
Finding the Characteristics of a Sinusoidal Wave
1. To find the amplitude, wavelength, period, and frequency of a sinusoidal wave, write down the wave function
in the form
2. 3. 4. 5. The amplitude can be read straight from the equation and is equal to A .
The period of the wave can be derived from the angular frequency
The frequency can be found using
The wavelength can be found using the wave number
EXAMPLE 16.3
Characteristics of a Traveling Wave on a String
A transverse wave on a taut string is modeled with the wave function
Find the amplitude, wavelength, period, and speed of the wave.
Strategy
All these characteristics of the wave can be found from the constants included in the equation or from simple
combinations of these constants.
Solution
1. The amplitude, wave number, and angular frequency can be read directly from the wave equation:
760 16 • Waves
2. The wave number can be used to find the wavelength:
3. The period of the wave can be found using the angular frequency:
4. The speed of the wave can be found using the wave number and the angular frequency. The direction of the
wave can be determined by considering the sign of : A negative sign suggests that the wave is moving
in the positive x-direction:
Significance
All of the characteristics of the wave are contained in the wave function. Note that the wave speed is the speed of
the wave in the direction parallel to the motion of the wave. Plotting the height of the medium y versus the position x
for two times and can provide a graphical visualization of the wave (Figure 16.11).
FIGURE 16.11 A graph of height of the wave y as a function of position x for snapshots of the wave at two times. The dotted line represents
the wave at time and the solid line represents the wave at Since the wave velocity is constant, the distance the wave
travels is the wave velocity times the time interval. The black dots indicate the points used to measure the displacement of the wave. The
medium moves up and down, whereas the wave moves to the right.
There is a second velocity to the motion. In this example, the wave is transverse, moving horizontally as the medium
oscillates up and down perpendicular to the direction of motion. The graph in Figure 16.12 shows the motion of the
medium at point as a function of time. Notice that the medium of the wave oscillates up and down
between and every period of 4.0 seconds.
Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 761
FIGURE 16.12 A graph of height of the wave y as a function of time tfor the position The medium oscillates between
and every period. The period represented picks two convenient points in the oscillations to measure the period.
The period can be measured between any two adjacent points with the same amplitude and the same velocity, The velocity can be
found by looking at the slope tangent to the point on a y-versus-tplot. Notice that at times and the heights and the
velocities are the same and the period of the oscillation is 4.00 s.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.3
The wave function above is derived using a sine function. Can a cosine function be used instead?
Velocity and Acceleration of the Medium
As seen in Example 16.4, the wave speed is constant and represents the speed of the wave as it propagates through
the medium, not the speed of the particles that make up the medium. The particles of the medium oscillate around
an equilibrium position as the wave propagates through the medium. In the case of the transverse wave propagating
in the x-direction, the particles oscillate up and down in the y-direction, perpendicular to the motion of the wave.
The velocity of the particles of the medium is not constant, which means there is an acceleration. The velocity of the
medium, which is perpendicular to the wave velocity in a transverse wave, can be found by taking the partial
derivative of the position equation with respect to time. The partial derivative is found by taking the derivative of the
function, treating all variables as constants, except for the variable in question. In the case of the partial derivative
with respect to time t , the position x is treated as a constant. Although this may sound strange if you haven’t seen it
before, the object of this exercise is to find the transverse velocity at a point, so in this sense, the x-position is not
changing. We have
. This may look familiar from the
The magnitude of the maximum velocity of the medium is Oscillations and a mass on a spring.
We can find the acceleration of the medium by taking the partial derivative of the velocity equation with respect to
time,
The magnitude of the maximum acceleration is The particles of the medium, or the mass elements,
762 16 • Waves
oscillate in simple harmonic motion for a mechanical wave.
The Linear Wave Equation
We have just determined the velocity of the medium at a position x by taking the partial derivative, with respect to
time, of the position y. For a transverse wave, this velocity is perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the
wave. We found the acceleration by taking the partial derivative, with respect to time, of the velocity, which is the
second time derivative of the position:
Now consider the partial derivatives with respect to the other variable, the position x, holding the time constant. The
first derivative is the slope of the wave at a point x at a time t ,
The second partial derivative expresses how the slope of the wave changes with respect to position—in other words,
the curvature of the wave, where
The ratio of the acceleration and the curvature leads to a very important relationship in physics known as the linear
wave equation. Taking the ratio and using the equation yields the linear wave equation (also known simply
as the wave equation or the equation of a vibrating string),
16.6
Equation 16.6 is the linear wave equation, which is one of the most important equations in physics and engineering.
We derived it here for a transverse wave, but it is equally important when investigating longitudinal waves. This
relationship was also derived using a sinusoidal wave, but it successfully describes any wave or pulse that has the
form These waves result due to a linear restoring force of the medium—thus, the name linear
wave equation. Any wave function that satisfies this equation is a linear wave function.
An interesting aspect of the linear wave equation is that if two wave functions are individually solutions to the linear
wave equation, then the sum of the two linear wave functions is also a solution to the wave equation. Consider two
transverse waves that propagate along the x-axis, occupying the same medium. Assume that the individual waves
can be modeled with the wave functions and which are solutions to the
linear wave equations and are therefore linear wave functions. The sum of the wave functions is the wave function
Consider the linear wave equation:
This has shown that if two linear wave functions are added algebraically, the resulting wave function is also linear.
This wave function models the displacement of the medium of the resulting wave at each position along the x-axis.
Access for free at openstax.org
16.2 • Mathematics of Waves 763
If two linear waves occupy the same medium, they are said to interfere. If these waves can be modeled with a linear
wave function, these wave functions add to form the wave equation of the wave resulting from the interference of
the individual waves. The displacement of the medium at every point of the resulting wave is the algebraic sum of
the displacements due to the individual waves.
Taking this analysis a step further, if wave functions and are solutions to
the linear wave equation, then where Aand Bare constants, is also a solution to the linear
wave equation. This property is known as the principle of superposition. Interference and superposition are covered
in more detail in Interference of Waves.
EXAMPLE 16.4
Interference of Waves on a String
Consider a very long string held taut by two students, one on each end. Student A oscillates the end of the string
producing a wave modeled with the wave function and student B oscillates the string
producing at twice the frequency, moving in the opposite direction. Both waves move at the same speed two waves interfere to form a resulting wave whose wave function is Find the
velocity of the resulting wave using the linear wave equation
Strategy
First, write the wave function for the wave created by the second student. Note that the angular frequency of the
second wave is twice the frequency of the first wave , and since the velocity of the two waves are the same, the
wave number of the second wave is twice that of the first wave Next, write the wave equation for the resulting
wave function, which is the sum of the two individual wave functions. Then find the second partial derivative with
respect to position and the second partial derivative with respect to time. Use the linear wave equation to find the
velocity of the resulting wave.
Solution
1. 2. Write the wave function of the second wave:
Write the resulting wave function:
The
3. Find the partial derivatives:
4. Use the wave equation to find the velocity of the resulting wave:
Significance
The speed of the resulting wave is equal to the speed of the original waves We will show in the next
section that the speed of a simple harmonic wave on a string depends on the tension in the string and the mass per
764 16 • Waves
length of the string. For this reason, it is not surprising that the component waves as well as the resultant wave all
travel at the same speed.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.4
The wave equation works for any wave of the form In the previous
section, we stated that a cosine function could also be used to model a simple harmonic mechanical wave. Check if
the wave
is a solution to the wave equation.
Any disturbance that complies with the wave equation can propagate as a wave moving along the x-axis with a wave
speed v. It works equally well for waves on a string, sound waves, and electromagnetic waves. This equation is
extremely useful. For example, it can be used to show that electromagnetic waves move at the speed of light.
16.3 Wave Speed on a Stretched String
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the factors that affect the speed of a wave on a string
• Write a mathematical expression for the speed of a wave on a string and generalize these concepts for
other media
The speed of a wave depends on the characteristics of the medium. For example, in the case of a guitar, the strings
vibrate to produce the sound. The speed of the waves on the strings, and the wavelength, determine the frequency
of the sound produced. The strings on a guitar have different thickness but may be made of similar material. They
have different linear densities, where the linear density is defined as the mass per length,
16.7
In this chapter, we consider only strings with a constant linear density. If the linear density is constant, then the
mass of a small length of string is For example, if the string has a length of 2.00 m and a
mass of 0.06 kg, then the linear density is If a 1.00-mm section is cut from the string, the
mass of the 1.00-mm length is The guitar also has a method
to change the tension of the strings. The tension of the strings is adjusted by turning spindles, called the tuning
pegs, around which the strings are wrapped. For the guitar, the linear density of the string and the tension in the
string determine the speed of the waves in the string and the frequency of the sound produced is proportional to the
wave speed.
Wave Speed on a String under Tension
To see how the speed of a wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear density, consider a pulse sent
down a taut string (Figure 16.13). When the taut string is at rest at the equilibrium position, the tension in the string
is constant. Consider a small element of the string with a mass equal to The mass element is at rest
and in equilibrium and the force of tension of either side of the mass element is equal and opposite.
FIGURE 16.13 Mass element of a string kept taut with a tension . The mass element is in static equilibrium, and the force of tension
Access for free at openstax.org
16.3 • Wave Speed on a Stretched String 765
acting on either side of the mass element is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
If you pluck a string under tension, a transverse wave moves in the positive x-direction, as shown in Figure 16.14.
The mass element is small but is enlarged in the figure to make it visible. The small mass element oscillates
perpendicular to the wave motion as a result of the restoring force provided by the string and does not move in the
x-direction. The tension in the string, which acts in the positive and negative x-direction, is approximately
constant and is independent of position and time.
FIGURE 16.14 A string under tension is plucked, causing a pulse to move along the string in the positive x-direction.
Assume that the inclination of the displaced string with respect to the horizontal axis is small. The net force on the
element of the string, acting parallel to the string, is the sum of the tension in the string and the restoring force. The
x-components of the force of tension cancel, so the net force is equal to the sum of the y-components of the force.
The magnitude of the x-component of the force is equal to the horizontal force of tension of the string as shown
in Figure 16.14. To obtain the y-components of the force, note that and The is
equal to the slope of a function at a point, which is equal to the partial derivative of y with respect to x at that point.
Therefore, is equal to the negative slope of the string at and is equal to the slope of the string at
The net force on the small mass element can be written as
Using Newton’s second law, the net force is equal to the mass times the acceleration. The linear density of the string
is the mass per length of the string, and the mass of the portion of the string is ,
Dividing by and taking the limit as approaches zero,
766 16 • Waves
Recall that the linear wave equation is
Therefore,
Solving for v, we see that the speed of the wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear density.
SPEED OF A WAVE ON A STRING UNDER TENSION
The speed of a pulse or wave on a string under tension can be found with the equation
16.8
where is the tension in the string and is the mass per length of the string.
EXAMPLE 16.5
The Wave Speed of a Guitar String
On a six-string guitar, the high E string has a linear density of and the low E string has
a linear density of (a) If the high E string is plucked, producing a wave in the string,
what is the speed of the wave if the tension of the string is 56.40 N? (b) The linear density of the low E string is
approximately 20 times greater than that of the high E string. For waves to travel through the low E string at the
same wave speed as the high E, would the tension need to be larger or smaller than the high E string? What would
be the approximate tension? (c) Calculate the tension of the low E string needed for the same wave speed.
Strategy
a. The speed of the wave can be found from the linear density and the tension
b. c. From the equation if the linear density is increased by a factor of almost 20, the tension would
need to be increased by a factor of 20.
Knowing the velocity and the linear density, the velocity equation can be solved for the force of tension
Solution
a. Use the velocity equation to find the speed:
b. The tension would need to be increased by a factor of approximately 20. The tension would be slightly less
Access for free at openstax.org
16.4 • Energy and Power of a Wave 767
c. than 1128 N.
Use the velocity equation to find the actual tension:
This solution is within of the approximation.
Significance
The standard notes of the six string (high E, B, G, D, A, low E) are tuned to vibrate at the fundamental frequencies
(329.63 Hz, 246.94Hz, 196.00Hz, 146.83Hz, 110.00Hz, and 82.41Hz) when plucked. The frequencies depend on
the speed of the waves on the string and the wavelength of the waves. The six strings have different linear densities
and are “tuned” by changing the tensions in the strings. We will see in Interference of Waves that the wavelength
depends on the length of the strings and the boundary conditions. To play notes other than the fundamental notes,
the lengths of the strings are changed by pressing down on the strings.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.5
The wave speed of a wave on a string depends on the tension and the linear mass density. If the tension is doubled,
what happens to the speed of the waves on the string?
Speed of Compression Waves in a Fluid
The speed of a wave on a string depends on the square root of the tension divided by the mass per length, the linear
density. In general, the speed of a wave through a medium depends on the elastic property of the medium and the
inertial property of the medium.
The elastic property describes the tendency of the particles of the medium to return to their initial position when
perturbed. The inertial property describes the tendency of the particle to resist changes in velocity.
The speed of a longitudinal wave through a liquid or gas depends on the density of the fluid and the bulk modulus of
the fluid,
16.9
Here the bulk modulus is defined as where is the change in the pressure and the denominator is
the ratio of the change in volume to the initial volume, and is the mass per unit volume. For example, sound
is a mechanical wave that travels through a fluid or a solid. The speed of sound in air with an atmospheric pressure
of and a temperature of is Because the density depends on temperature,
the speed of sound in air depends on the temperature of the air. This will be discussed in detail in Sound.
16.4 Energy and Power of a Wave
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how energy travels with a pulse or wave
• Describe, using a mathematical expression, how the energy in a wave depends on the amplitude of the
wave
All waves carry energy, and sometimes this can be directly observed. Earthquakes can shake whole cities to the
ground, performing the work of thousands of wrecking balls (Figure 16.15). Loud sounds can pulverize nerve cells in
the inner ear, causing permanent hearing loss. Ultrasound is used for deep-heat treatment of muscle strains. A laser
768 16 • Waves
beam can burn away a malignancy. Water waves chew up beaches.
FIGURE 16.15 The destructive effect of an earthquake is observable evidence of the energy carried in these waves. The Richter scale rating
of earthquakes is a logarithmic scale related to both their amplitude and the energy they carry.
In this section, we examine the quantitative expression of energy in waves. This will be of fundamental importance
in later discussions of waves, from sound to light to quantum mechanics.
Energy in Waves
The amount of energy in a wave is related to its amplitude and its frequency. Large-amplitude earthquakes produce
large ground displacements. Loud sounds have high-pressure amplitudes and come from larger-amplitude source
vibrations than soft sounds. Large ocean breakers churn up the shore more than small ones. Consider the example
of the seagull and the water wave earlier in the chapter (Figure 16.3). Work is done on the seagull by the wave as the
seagull is moved up, changing its potential energy. The larger the amplitude, the higher the seagull is lifted by the
wave and the larger the change in potential energy.
The energy of the wave depends on both the amplitude and the frequency. If the energy of each wavelength is
considered to be a discrete packet of energy, a high-frequency wave will deliver more of these packets per unit time
than a low-frequency wave. We will see that the average rate of energy transfer in mechanical waves is proportional
to both the square of the amplitude and the square of the frequency. If two mechanical waves have equal
amplitudes, but one wave has a frequency equal to twice the frequency of the other, the higher-frequency wave will
have a rate of energy transfer a factor of four times as great as the rate of energy transfer of the lower-frequency
wave. It should be noted that although the rate of energy transport is proportional to both the square of the
amplitude and square of the frequency in mechanical waves, the rate of energy transfer in electromagnetic waves is
proportional to the square of the amplitude, but independent of the frequency.
Power in Waves
Consider a sinusoidal wave on a string that is produced by a string vibrator, as shown in Figure 16.16. The string
vibrator is a device that vibrates a rod up and down. A string of uniform linear mass density is attached to the rod,
and the rod oscillates the string, producing a sinusoidal wave. The rod does work on the string, producing energy
that propagates along the string. Consider a mass element of the string with a mass , as seen in Figure 16.16. As
the energy propagates along the string, each mass element of the string is driven up and down at the same
frequency as the wave. Each mass element of the string can be modeled as a simple harmonic oscillator. Since the
string has a constant linear density each mass element of the string has the mass
Access for free at openstax.org
16.4 • Energy and Power of a Wave 769
FIGURE 16.16 A string vibrator is a device that vibrates a rod. A string is attached to the rod, and the rod does work on the string, driving
the string up and down. This produces a sinusoidal wave in the string, which moves with a wave velocity v. The wave speed depends on the
tension in the string and the linear mass density of the string. A section of the string with mass oscillates at the same frequency as the
wave.
is The total mechanical energy of the wave is the sum of its kinetic energy and potential energy. The kinetic energy
of each mass element of the string of length as the mass element oscillates
perpendicular to the direction of the motion of the wave. Using the constant linear mass density, the kinetic energy
of each mass element of the string with length is
A differential equation can be formed by letting the length of the mass element of the string approach zero,
Since the wave is a sinusoidal wave with an angular frequency the position of each mass element may be
modeled as Each mass element of the string oscillates with a velocity
The kinetic energy of each mass element of the string becomes
The wave can be very long, consisting of many wavelengths. To standardize the energy, consider the kinetic energy
associated with a wavelength of the wave. This kinetic energy can be integrated over the wavelength to find the
energy associated with each wavelength of the wave:
There is also potential energy associated with the wave. Much like the mass oscillating on a spring, there is a
conservative restoring force that, when the mass element is displaced from the equilibrium position, drives the
mass element back to the equilibrium position. The potential energy of the mass element can be found by
considering the linear restoring force of the string, In Oscillations, we saw that the potential energy stored in a
spring with a linear restoring force is equal to where the equilibrium position is defined as
When a mass attached to the spring oscillates in simple harmonic motion, the angular frequency is equal to
As each mass element oscillates in simple harmonic motion, the spring constant is equal to
The potential energy of the mass element is equal to
Note that is the spring constant and not the wave number This equation can be used to find the energy
over a wavelength. Integrating over the wavelength, we can compute the potential energy over a wavelength:
770 16 • Waves
The potential energy associated with a wavelength of the wave is equal to the kinetic energy associated with a
wavelength.
The total energy associated with a wavelength is the sum of the potential energy and the kinetic energy:
The time-averaged power of a sinusoidal mechanical wave, which is the average rate of energy transfer associated
with a wave as it passes a point, can be found by taking the total energy associated with the wave divided by the
time it takes to transfer the energy. If the velocity of the sinusoidal wave is constant, the time for one wavelength to
pass by a point is equal to the period of the wave, which is also constant. For a sinusoidal mechanical wave, the
time-averaged power is therefore the energy associated with a wavelength divided by the period of the wave. The
wavelength of the wave divided by the period is equal to the velocity of the wave,
16.10
Note that this equation for the time-averaged power of a sinusoidal mechanical wave shows that the power is
proportional to the square of the amplitude of the wave and to the square of the angular frequency of the wave.
Recall that the angular frequency is equal to , so the power of a mechanical wave is equal to the square of
the amplitude and the square of the frequency of the wave.
EXAMPLE 16.6
Power Supplied by a String Vibrator
Consider a two-meter-long string with a mass of 70.00 g attached to a string vibrator as illustrated in Figure 16.16.
The tension in the string is 90.0 N. When the string vibrator is turned on, it oscillates with a frequency of 60 Hz and
produces a sinusoidal wave on the string with an amplitude of 4.00 cm and a constant wave speed. What is the
time-averaged power supplied to the wave by the string vibrator?
Strategy
The power supplied to the wave should equal the time-averaged power of the wave on the string. We know the mass
of the string , the length of the string , and the tension in the string. The speed of the wave on the
string can be derived from the linear mass density and the tension. The string oscillates with the same frequency as
the string vibrator, from which we can find the angular frequency.
Solution
1. Begin with the equation of the time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave on a string:
2. The amplitude is given, so we need to calculate the linear mass density of the string, the angular frequency of
the wave on the string, and the speed of the wave on the string.
We need to calculate the linear density to find the wave speed:
3. The wave speed can be found using the linear mass density and the tension of the string:
Access for free at openstax.org
16.4 • Energy and Power of a Wave 771
4. The angular frequency can be found from the frequency:
5. Calculate the time-averaged power:
Significance
The time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave is proportional to the square of the amplitude of the wave and the
square of the angular frequency of the wave. This is true for most mechanical waves. If either the angular frequency
or the amplitude of the wave were doubled, the power would increase by a factor of four. The time-averaged power
of the wave on a string is also proportional to the speed of the sinusoidal wave on the string. If the speed were
doubled, by increasing the tension by a factor of four, the power would also be doubled.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.6
Is the time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave on a string proportional to the linear density of the string?
The equations for the energy of the wave and the time-averaged power were derived for a sinusoidal wave on a
string. In general, the energy of a mechanical wave and the power are proportional to the amplitude squared and to
the angular frequency squared (and therefore the frequency squared).
Another important characteristic of waves is the intensity of the waves. Waves can also be concentrated or spread
out. Waves from an earthquake, for example, spread out over a larger area as they move away from a source, so they
do less damage the farther they get from the source. Changing the area the waves cover has important effects. All
these pertinent factors are included in the definition of intensity (I ) as power per unit area:
16.11
where Pis the power carried by the wave through area A . The definition of intensity is valid for any energy in transit,
including that carried by waves. The SI unit for intensity is watts per square meter (W/m2). Many waves are
spherical waves that move out from a source as a sphere. For example, a sound speaker mounted on a post above
the ground may produce sound waves that move away from the source as a spherical wave. Sound waves are
discussed in more detail in the next chapter, but in general, the farther you are from the speaker, the less intense the
sound you hear. As a spherical wave moves out from a source, the surface area of the wave increases as the radius
increases The intensity for a spherical wave is therefore
16.12
If there are no dissipative forces, the energy will remain constant as the spherical wave moves away from the
source, but the intensity will decrease as the surface area increases.
In the case of the two-dimensional circular wave, the wave moves out, increasing the circumference of the wave as
the radius of the circle increases. If you toss a pebble in a pond, the surface ripple moves out as a circular wave. As
the ripple moves away from the source, the amplitude decreases. The energy of the wave spreads around a larger
circumference and the intensity decreases proportional to which is also the same in the case of a spherical wave,
since intensity is proportional to the amplitude squared.
772 16 • Waves
16.5 Interference of Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how mechanical waves are reflected and transmitted at the boundaries of a medium
• Define the terms interference and superposition
• Find the resultant wave of two identical sinusoidal waves that differ only by a phase shift
Up to now, we have been studying mechanical waves that propagate continuously through a medium, but we have
not discussed what happens when waves encounter the boundary of the medium or what happens when a wave
encounters another wave propagating through the same medium. Waves do interact with boundaries of the medium,
and all or part of the wave can be reflected. For example, when you stand some distance from a rigid cliff face and
yell, you can hear the sound waves reflect off the rigid surface as an echo. Waves can also interact with other waves
propagating in the same medium. If you throw two rocks into a pond some distance from one another, the circular
ripples that result from the two stones seem to pass through one another as they propagate out from where the
stones entered the water. This phenomenon is known as interference. In this section, we examine what happens to
waves encountering a boundary of a medium or another wave propagating in the same medium. We will see that
their behavior is quite different from the behavior of particles and rigid bodies. Later, when we study modern
physics, we will see that only at the scale of atoms do we see similarities in the properties of waves and particles.
Reflection and Transmission
When a wave propagates through a medium, it reflects when it encounters the boundary of the medium. The wave
before hitting the boundary is known as the incident wave. The wave after encountering the boundary is known as
the reflected wave. How the wave is reflected at the boundary of the medium depends on the boundary conditions;
waves will react differently if the boundary of the medium is fixed in place or free to move (Figure 16.17). A fixed
boundary condition exists when the medium at a boundary is fixed in place so it cannot move. A free boundary
condition exists when the medium at the boundary is free to move.
FIGURE 16.17 (a) One end of a string is fixed so that it cannot move. A wave propagating on the string, encountering this fixed boundar y
condition, is reflected out of phase with respect to the incident wave. (b) One end of a string is tied to a solid ring of negligible
mass on a frictionless lab pole, where the ring is free to move. A wave propagating on the string, encountering this free boundar y condition,
is reflected in phase with respect to the wave.
Part (a) of the Figure 16.17 shows a fixed boundary condition. Here, one end of the string is fixed to a wall so the end
of the string is fixed in place and the medium (the string) at the boundary cannot move. When the wave is reflected,
Access for free at openstax.org
16.5 • Interference of Waves 773
the amplitude of the reflected wave is exactly the same as the amplitude of the incident wave, but the reflected
wave is reflected out of phase with respect to the incident wave. The phase change can be explained
using Newton’s third law: Recall that Newton’s third law states that when object Aexerts a force on object B , then
object Bexerts an equal and opposite force on object A . As the incident wave encounters the wall, the string exerts
an upward force on the wall and the wall reacts by exerting an equal and opposite force on the string. The reflection
at a fixed boundary is inverted. Note that the figure shows a crest of the incident wave reflected as a trough. If the
incident wave were a trough, the reflected wave would be a crest.
Part (b) of the figure shows a free boundary condition. Here, one end of the string is tied to a solid ring of negligible
mass on a frictionless pole, so the end of the string is free to move up and down. As the incident wave encounters
the boundary of the medium, it is also reflected. In the case of a free boundary condition, the reflected wave is in
phase with respect to the incident wave. In this case, the wave encounters the free boundary applying an upward
force on the ring, accelerating the ring up. The ring travels up to the maximum height equal to the amplitude of the
wave and then accelerates down towards the equilibrium position due to the tension in the string. The figure shows
the crest of an incident wave being reflected in phase with respect to the incident wave as a crest. If the incident
wave were a trough, the reflected wave would also be a trough. The amplitude of the reflected wave would be equal
to the amplitude of the incident wave.
In some situations, the boundary of the medium is neither fixed nor free. Consider Figure 16.18(a), where a low-
linear mass density string is attached to a string of a higher linear mass density. In this case, the reflected wave is
out of phase with respect to the incident wave. There is also a transmitted wave that is in phase with respect to the
incident wave. Both the transmitted and the reflected waves have amplitudes less than the amplitude of the
incident wave. If the tension is the same in both strings, the wave speed is higher in the string with the lower linear
mass density.
FIGURE 16.18 Waves traveling along two types of strings: a thick string with a high linear density and a thin string with a low linear density.
Both strings are under the same tension, so a wave moves faster on the low-density string than on the high-density string. (a) A wave
moving from a low-density to a high-density medium results in a reflected wave that is out of phase with respect to the
incident pulse (or wave) and a transmitted wave that is in phase with the incident wave. (b) When a wave moves from a high-density
medium to a low-density medium, both the reflected and transmitted wave are in phase with respect to the incident wave.
Part (b) of the figure shows a high-linear mass density string is attached to a string of a lower linear density. In this
case, the reflected wave is in phase with respect to the incident wave. There is also a transmitted wave that is in
phase with respect to the incident wave. Both the incident and the reflected waves have amplitudes less than the
774 16 • Waves
amplitude of the incident wave. Here you may notice that if the tension is the same in both strings, the wave speed
is higher in the string with the lower linear mass density.
Superposition and Interference
Most waves do not look very simple. Complex waves are more interesting, even beautiful, but they look formidable.
Most interesting mechanical waves consist of a combination of two or more traveling waves propagating in the same
medium. The principle of superposition can be used to analyze the combination of waves.
Consider two simple pulses of the same amplitude moving toward one another in the same medium, as shown in
Figure 16.19. Eventually, the waves overlap, producing a wave that has twice the amplitude, and then continue on
unaffected by the encounter. The pulses are said to interfere, and this phenomenon is known as interference.
FIGURE 16.19 Two pulses moving toward one another experience interference. The term interference refers to what happens when two
waves overlap.
To analyze the interference of two or more waves, we use the principle of superposition. For mechanical waves, the
principle of superposition states that if two or more traveling waves combine at the same point, the resulting
position of the mass element of the medium, at that point, is the algebraic sum of the position due to the individual
waves. This property is exhibited by many waves observed, such as waves on a string, sound waves, and surface
water waves. Electromagnetic waves also obey the superposition principle, but the electric and magnetic fields of
the combined wave are added instead of the displacement of the medium. Waves that obey the superposition
principle are linear waves; waves that do not obey the superposition principle are said to be nonlinear waves. In this
chapter, we deal with linear waves, in particular, sinusoidal waves.
The superposition principle can be understood by considering the linear wave equation. In Mathematics of a Wave,
we defined a linear wave as a wave whose mathematical representation obeys the linear wave equation. For a
transverse wave on a string with an elastic restoring force, the linear wave equation is
Access for free at openstax.org
16.5 • Interference of Waves 775
Any wave function where the argument of the function is linear is a solution to the
linear wave equation and is a linear wave function. If wave functions and are solutions to the linear
wave equation, the sum of the two functions is also a solution to the linear wave equation.
Mechanical waves that obey superposition are normally restricted to waves with amplitudes that are small with
respect to their wavelengths. If the amplitude is too large, the medium is distorted past the region where the
restoring force of the medium is linear.
Waves can interfere constructively or destructively. Figure 16.20 shows two identical sinusoidal waves that arrive at
the same point exactly in phase. Figure 16.20(a) and (b) show the two individual waves, Figure 16.20(c) shows the
resultant wave that results from the algebraic sum of the two linear waves. The crests of the two waves are precisely
aligned, as are the troughs. This superposition produces constructive interference. Because the disturbances add,
constructive interference produces a wave that has twice the amplitude of the individual waves, but has the same
wavelength.
Figure 16.21 shows two identical waves that arrive exactly out of phase, producing destructive interference.
Figure 16.21(a) and (b) show the individual waves, and Figure 16.21(c) shows the superposition of the two waves.
Because the troughs of one wave add the crest of the other wave, the resulting amplitude is zero for destructive
interference—the waves completely cancel.
FIGURE 16.20 Constructive interference of two identical waves produces a wave with twice the amplitude, but the same wavelength.
776 16 • Waves
FIGURE 16.21 Destructive interference of two identical waves, one with a phase shift of , produces zero amplitude, or
complete cancellation.
When linear waves interfere, the resultant wave is just the algebraic sum of the individual waves as stated in the
principle of superposition. Figure 16.22 shows two waves (red and blue) and the resultant wave (black). The
resultant wave is the algebraic sum of the two individual waves.
Access for free at openstax.org
16.5 • Interference of Waves 777
FIGURE 16.22 When two linear waves in the same medium interfere, the height of resulting wave is the sum of the heights of the individual
waves, taken point by point. This plot shows two waves (red and blue) added together, along with the resulting wave (black). These graphs
represent the height of the wave at each point. The waves may be any linear wave, including ripples on a pond, disturbances on a string,
sound, or electromagnetic waves.
The superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference, and can vary
from place to place and time to time. Sound from a stereo, for example, can be loud in one spot and quiet in another.
Varying loudness means the sound waves add partially constructively and partially destructively at different
locations. A stereo has at least two speakers creating sound waves, and waves can reflect from walls. All these
waves interfere, and the resulting wave is the superposition of the waves.
We have shown several examples of the superposition of waves that are similar. Figure 16.23 illustrates an example
of the superposition of two dissimilar waves. Here again, the disturbances add, producing a resultant wave.
FIGURE 16.23 Superposition of nonidentical waves exhibits both constructive and destructive interference.
778 16 • Waves
At times, when two or more mechanical waves interfere, the pattern produced by the resulting wave can be rich in
complexity, some without any readily discernable patterns. For example, plotting the sound wave of your favorite
music can look quite complex and is the superposition of the individual sound waves from many instruments; it is
the complexity that makes the music interesting and worth listening to. At other times, waves can interfere and
produce interesting phenomena, which are complex in their appearance and yet beautiful in simplicity of the
physical principle of superposition, which formed the resulting wave. One example is the phenomenon known as
standing waves, produced by two identical waves moving in different directions. We will look more closely at this
phenomenon in the next section.
INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation below to make waves with a dripping faucet, audio speaker, or laser! Add a second
source or a pair of slits to create an interference pattern. You can observe one source or two sources. Using two
sources, you can observe the interference patterns that result from varying the frequencies and the amplitudes of
the sources.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/16-5-interference-of-
waves)
Superposition of Sinusoidal Waves that Differ by a Phase Shift
Many examples in physics consist of two sinusoidal waves that are identical in amplitude, wave number, and angular
frequency, but differ by a phase shift:
When these two waves exist in the same medium, the resultant wave resulting from the superposition of the two
individual waves is the sum of the two individual waves:
The resultant wave can be better understood by using the trigonometric identity:
where and . The resulting wave becomes
This equation is usually written as
16.13
The resultant wave has the same wave number and angular frequency, an amplitude of and
a phase shift equal to half the original phase shift. Examples of waves that differ only in a phase shift are shown in
Figure 16.24. The red and blue waves each have the same amplitude, wave number, and angular frequency, and
differ only in a phase shift. They therefore have the same period, wavelength, and frequency. The green wave is the
result of the superposition of the two waves. When the two waves have a phase difference of zero, the waves are in
phase, and the resultant wave has the same wave number and angular frequency, and an amplitude equal to twice
the individual amplitudes (part (a)). This is constructive interference. If the phase difference is the waves
interfere in destructive interference (part (c)). The resultant wave has an amplitude of zero. Any other phase
Access for free at openstax.org
16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 779
difference results in a wave with the same wave number and angular frequency as the two incident waves but with a
phase shift of and an amplitude equal to Examples are shown in parts (b) and (d).
FIGURE 16.24 Superposition of two waves with identical amplitudes, wavelengths, and frequency, but that differ in a phase shift. The red
wave is defined by the wave function and the blue wave is defined by the wave function
. The black line shows the result of adding the two waves. The phase difference between the two waves are
(a) (b) (c) and (d) .
16.6 Standing Waves and Resonance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe standing waves and explain how they are produced
• Describe the modes of a standing wave on a string
• Provide examples of standing waves beyond the waves on a string
Throughout this chapter, we have been studying traveling waves, or waves that transport energy from one place to
another. Under certain conditions, waves can bounce back and forth through a particular region, effectively
becoming stationary. These are called standing waves.
Another related effect is known as resonance. In Oscillations, we defined resonance as a phenomenon in which a
small-amplitude driving force could produce large-amplitude motion. Think of a child on a swing, which can be
modeled as a physical pendulum. Relatively small-amplitude pushes by a parent can produce large-amplitude
swings. Sometimes this resonance is good—for example, when producing music with a stringed instrument. At other
780 16 • Waves
times, the effects can be devastating, such as the collapse of a building during an earthquake. In the case of
standing waves, the relatively large amplitude standing waves are produced by the superposition of smaller
amplitude component waves.
Standing Waves
Sometimes waves do not seem to move; rather, they just vibrate in place. You can see unmoving waves on the
surface of a glass of milk in a refrigerator, for example. Vibrations from the refrigerator motor create waves on the
milk that oscillate up and down but do not seem to move across the surface. Figure 16.25 shows an experiment you
can try at home. Take a bowl of milk and place it on a common box fan. Vibrations from the fan will produce circular
standing waves in the milk. The waves are visible in the photo due to the reflection from a lamp. These waves are
formed by the superposition of two or more traveling waves, such as illustrated in Figure 16.26 for two identical
waves moving in opposite directions. The waves move through each other with their disturbances adding as they go
by. If the two waves have the same amplitude and wavelength, then they alternate between constructive and
destructive interference. The resultant looks like a wave standing in place and, thus, is called a standing wave.
FIGURE 16.25 Standing waves are formed on the surface of a bowl of milk sitting on a box fan. The vibrations from the fan causes the
surface of the milk to oscillate. The waves are visible due to the reflection of light from a lamp. (credit: David Chelton)
Access for free at openstax.org
16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 781
FIGURE 16.26 Time snapshots of two sine waves. The red wave is moving in the −x-direction and the blue wave is moving in the
+x-direction. The resulting wave is shown in black. Consider the resultant wave at the points and notice
that the resultant wave always equals zero at these points, no matter what the time is. These points are known as fixed points (nodes). In
between each two nodes is an antinode, a place where the medium oscillates with an amplitude equal to the sum of the amplitudes of the
individual waves.
Consider two identical waves that move in opposite directions. The first wave has a wave function of
and the second wave has a wave function . The waves
interfere and form a resultant wave
782 16 • Waves
This can be simplified using the trigonometric identity
where and , giving us
which simplifies to
16.14
Notice that the resultant wave is a sine wave that is a function only of position, multiplied by a cosine function that is
a function only of time. Graphs of y(x,t ) as a function of x for various times are shown in Figure 16.26. The red wave
moves in the negative x-direction, the blue wave moves in the positive x-direction, and the black wave is the sum of
the two waves. As the red and blue waves move through each other, they move in and out of constructive
interference and destructive interference.
Initially, at time the two waves are in phase, and the result is a wave that is twice the amplitude of the
individual waves. The waves are also in phase at the time In fact, the waves are in phase at any integer
multiple of half of a period:
At other times, the two waves are happens at
out of phase, and the resulting wave is equal to zero. This
Notice that some x-positions of the resultant wave are always zero no matter what the phase relationship is. These
positions are called nodes. Where do the nodes occur? Consider the solution to the sum of the two waves
Finding the positions where the sine function equals zero provides the positions of the nodes.
There are also positions where y oscillates between considering which values of x result in .
. These are the antinodes. We can find them by
What results is a standing wave as shown in Figure 16.27, which shows snapshots of the resulting wave of two
identical waves moving in opposite directions. The resulting wave appears to be a sine wave with nodes at integer
multiples of half wavelengths. The antinodes oscillate between due to the cosine term, , which
oscillates between .
The resultant wave appears to be standing still, with no apparent movement in the x-direction, although it is
Access for free at openstax.org
16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 783
composed of one wave function moving in the positive, whereas the second wave is moving in the negative
x-direction. Figure 16.27 shows various snapshots of the resulting wave. The nodes are marked with red dots while
the antinodes are marked with blue dots.
FIGURE 16.27 When two identical waves are moving in opposite directions, the resultant wave is a standing wave. Nodes appear at integer
multiples of half wavelengths. Antinodes appear at odd multiples of quarter wavelengths, where they oscillate between The nodes
are marked with red dots and the antinodes are marked with blue dots.
A common example of standing waves are the waves produced by stringed musical instruments. When the string is
plucked, pulses travel along the string in opposite directions. The ends of the strings are fixed in place, so nodes
appear at the ends of the strings—the boundary conditions of the system, regulating the resonant frequencies in the
strings. The resonance produced on a string instrument can be modeled in a physics lab using the apparatus shown
in Figure 16.28.
FIGURE 16.28 A lab setup for creating standing waves on a string. The string has a node on each end and a constant linear density. The
length between the fixed boundary conditions is L . The hanging mass provides the tension in the string, and the speed of the waves on the
string is proportional to the square root of the tension divided by the linear mass density.
The lab setup shows a string attached to a string vibrator, which oscillates the string with an adjustable frequency f .
The other end of the string passes over a frictionless pulley and is tied to a hanging mass. The magnitude of the
tension in the string is equal to the weight of the hanging mass. The string has a constant linear density (mass per
length) and the speed at which a wave travels down the string equals Equation 16.7. The
symmetrical boundary conditions (a node at each end) dictate the possible frequencies that can excite standing
waves. Starting from a frequency of zero and slowly increasing the frequency, the first mode shown in Figure 16.29. The first mode, also called the fundamental mode or the first harmonic, shows half of a
wavelength has formed, so the wavelength is equal to twice the length between the nodes appears as
. The
fundamental frequency, or first harmonic frequency, that drives this mode is
where the speed of the wave is second harmonic or the Keeping the tension constant and increasing the frequency leads to the
mode. This mode is a full wavelength and the frequency is twice the
784 16 • Waves
fundamental frequency:
FIGURE 16.29 Standing waves created on a string of length L . A node occurs at each end of the string. The nodes are boundary conditions
that limit the possible frequencies that excite standing waves. (Note that the amplitudes of the oscillations have been kept constant for
visualization. The standing wave patterns possible on the string are known as the normal modes. Conducting this experiment in the lab
would result in a decrease in amplitude as the frequency increases.)
The next two modes, or the third and fourth harmonics, have wavelengths of and driven by
frequencies of and All frequencies above the frequency are known as the
overtones. The equations for the wavelength and the frequency can be summarized as:
16.15
16.16
The standing wave patterns that are possible for a string, the first four of which are shown in Figure 16.29, are
known as the normal modes, with frequencies known as the normal frequencies. In summary, the first frequency to
produce a normal mode is called the fundamental frequency (or first harmonic). Any frequencies above the
fundamental frequency are overtones. The second frequency of the normal mode of the string is the first
overtone (or second harmonic). The frequency of the normal mode is the second overtone (or third harmonic)
and so on.
The solutions shown as Equation 16.15 and Equation 16.16 are for a string with the boundary condition of a node on
each end. When the boundary condition on either side is the same, the system is said to have symmetric boundary
conditions. Equation 16.15 and Equation 16.16 are good for any symmetric boundary conditions, that is, nodes at
both ends or antinodes at both ends.
EXAMPLE 16.7
Standing Waves on a String
Consider a string of attached to an adjustable-frequency string vibrator as shown in Figure 16.30. The
waves produced by the vibrator travel down the string and are reflected by the fixed boundary condition at the
pulley. The string, which has a linear mass density of is passed over a frictionless pulley of a
Access for free at openstax.org
16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 785
negligible mass, and the tension is provided by a 2.00-kg hanging mass. (a) What is the velocity of the waves on the
string? (b) Draw a sketch of the first three normal modes of the standing waves that can be produced on the string
and label each with the wavelength. (c) List the frequencies that the string vibrator must be tuned to in order to
produce the first three normal modes of the standing waves.
FIGURE 16.30 A string attached to an adjustable-frequency string vibrator.
The tension is provided by the weight of the hanging
Strategy
a. b. c. The velocity of the wave can be found using mass.
The standing waves will depend on the boundary conditions. There must be a node at each end. The first
mode will be one half of a wave. The second can be found by adding a half wavelength. That is the shortest
length that will result in a node at the boundaries. For example, adding one quarter of a wavelength will result
in an antinode at the boundary and is not a mode which would satisfy the boundary conditions. This is shown
in Figure 16.31.
Since the wave speed velocity is the wavelength times the frequency, the frequency is wave speed divided by
the wavelength.
FIGURE 16.31 (a) The figure represents the second mode of the string that satisfies the boundary conditions of a node at each end
of the string. (b)This figure could not possibly be a normal mode on the string because it does not satisfy the boundary conditions.
There is a node on one end, but an antinode on the other.
Solution
a. Begin with the velocity of a wave on a string. The tension is equal to the weight of the hanging mass. The linear
mass density and mass of the hanging mass are given:
b. The first normal mode that has a node on each end is a half wavelength. The next two modes are found by
adding a half of a wavelength.
786 16 • Waves
c. The frequencies of the first three modes are found by using
Significance
The three standing modes in this example were produced by maintaining the tension in the string and adjusting the
driving frequency. Keeping the tension in the string constant results in a constant velocity. The same modes could
have been produced by keeping the frequency constant and adjusting the speed of the wave in the string (by
changing the hanging mass.)
INTERACTIVE
Engage the Phet simulation below to play with a 1D or 2D system of coupled mass-spring oscillators. Vary the
number of masses, set the initial conditions, and watch the system evolve. See the spectrum of normal modes for
arbitrary motion. See longitudinal or transverse modes in the 1D system.
Access multimedia content (https:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-1/pages/16-6-standing-waves-
and-resonance)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 16.7
The equations for the wavelengths and the frequencies of the modes of a wave produced on a string:
were derived by considering a wave on a string where there were symmetric boundary conditions of a node at each
end. These modes resulted from two sinusoidal waves with identical characteristics except they were moving in
opposite directions, confined to a region Lwith nodes required at both ends. Will the same equations work if there
were symmetric boundary conditions with antinodes at each end? What would the normal modes look like for a
medium that was free to oscillate on each end? Don’t worry for now if you cannot imagine such a medium, just
consider two sinusoidal wave functions in a region of length L , with antinodes on each end.
The free boundary conditions shown in the last Check Your Understanding may seem hard to visualize. How can
there be a system that is free to oscillate on each end? In Figure 16.32 are shown two possible configuration of a
Access for free at openstax.org
16.6 • Standing Waves and Resonance 787
metallic rods (shown in red) attached to two supports (shown in blue). In part (a), the rod is supported at the ends,
and there are fixed boundary conditions at both ends. Given the proper frequency, the rod can be driven into
resonance with a wavelength equal to length of the rod, with nodes at each end. In part (b), the rod is supported at
positions one quarter of the length from each end of the rod, and there are free boundary conditions at both ends.
Given the proper frequency, this rod can also be driven into resonance with a wavelength equal to the length of the
rod, but there are antinodes at each end. If you are having trouble visualizing the wavelength in this figure,
remember that the wavelength may be measured between any two nearest identical points and consider Figure
16.33.
FIGURE 16.32 (a) A metallic rod of length L(red) supported by two supports (blue) on each end. When driven at the proper frequency, the
rod can resonate with a wavelength equal to the length of the rod with a node on each end. (b) The same metallic rod of length L(red)
supported by two supports (blue) at a position a quarter of the length of the rod from each end. When driven at the proper frequency, the
rod can resonate with a wavelength equal to the length of the rod with an antinode on each end.
FIGURE 16.33 A wavelength may be measure between the nearest two repeating points. On the wave on a string, this means the same
height and slope. (a) The wavelength is measured between the two nearest points where the height is zero and the slope is maximum and
positive. (b) The wavelength is measured between two identical points where the height is maximum and the slope is zero.
Note that the study of standing waves can become quite complex. In Figure 16.32(a), the mode of the
standing wave is shown, and it results in a wavelength equal to L . In this configuration, the mode would also
have been possible with a standing wave equal to 2L . Is it possible to get the mode for the configuration
shown in part (b)? The answer is no. In this configuration, there are additional conditions set beyond the boundary
conditions. Since the rod is mounted at a point one quarter of the length from each side, a node must exist there,
and this limits the possible modes of standing waves that can be created. We leave it as an exercise for the reader to
consider if other modes of standing waves are possible. It should be noted that when a system is driven at a
frequency that does not cause the system to resonate, vibrations may still occur, but the amplitude of the vibrations
will be much smaller than the amplitude at resonance.
A field of mechanical engineering uses the sound produced by the vibrating parts of complex mechanical systems to
troubleshoot problems with the systems. Suppose a part in an automobile is resonating at the frequency of the car’s
engine, causing unwanted vibrations in the automobile. This may cause the engine to fail prematurely. The
engineers use microphones to record the sound produced by the engine, then use a technique called Fourier
788 16 • Waves
analysis to find frequencies of sound produced with large amplitudes and then look at the parts list of the
automobile to find a part that would resonate at that frequency. The solution may be as simple as changing the
composition of the material used or changing the length of the part in question.
There are other numerous examples of resonance in standing waves in the physical world. The air in a tube, such as
found in a musical instrument like a flute, can be forced into resonance and produce a pleasant sound, as we
discuss in Sound.
At other times, resonance can cause serious problems. A closer look at earthquakes provides evidence for
conditions appropriate for resonance, standing waves, and constructive and destructive interference. A building may
vibrate for several seconds with a driving frequency matching that of the natural frequency of vibration of the
building—producing a resonance resulting in one building collapsing while neighboring buildings do not. Often,
buildings of a certain height are devastated while other taller buildings remain intact. The building height matches
the condition for setting up a standing wave for that particular height. The span of the roof is also important. Often it
is seen that gymnasiums, supermarkets, and churches suffer damage when individual homes suffer far less damage.
The roofs with large surface areas supported only at the edges resonate at the frequencies of the earthquakes,
causing them to collapse. As the earthquake waves travel along the surface of Earth and reflect off denser rocks,
constructive interference occurs at certain points. Often areas closer to the epicenter are not damaged, while areas
farther away are damaged.
Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter Review
Key Terms
antinode location of maximum amplitude in standing
waves
constructive interference when two waves arrive at
the same point exactly in phase; that is, the crests
of the two waves are precisely aligned, as are the
troughs
destructive interference when two identical waves
arrive at the same point exactly out of phase; that is,
precisely aligned crest to trough
fixed boundary condition when the medium at a
boundary is fixed in place so it cannot move
free boundary condition exists when the medium at
the boundary is free to move
fundamental frequency lowest frequency that will
produce a standing wave
intensity (I ) power per unit area
interference overlap of two or more waves at the
same point and time
linear wave equation equation describing waves that
result from a linear restoring force of the medium;
any function that is a solution to the wave equation
describes a wave moving in the positive x-direction
or the negative x-direction with a constant wave
speed v
longitudinal wave wave in which the disturbance is
parallel to the direction of propagation
mechanical wave wave that is governed by Newton’s
laws and requires a medium
Key Equations
Wave speed
Linear mass density
Speed of a wave or pulse on a string under
tension
Speed of a compression wave in a fluid
Resultant wave from superposition of two
sinusoidal waves that are identical except for a
phase shift
Wave number
Wave speed
A periodic wave
Phase of a wave
The linear wave equation
Power averaged over a wavelength
Intensity
16 • Chapter Review 789
node point where the string does not move; more
generally, nodes are where the wave disturbance is
zero in a standing wave
normal mode possible standing wave pattern for a
standing wave on a string
overtone frequency that produces standing waves
and is higher than the fundamental frequency
pulse single disturbance that moves through a
medium, transferring energy but not mass
standing wave wave that can bounce back and forth
through a particular region, effectively becoming
stationary
superposition phenomenon that occurs when two or
more waves arrive at the same point
transverse wave wave in which the disturbance is
perpendicular to the direction of propagation
wave disturbance that moves from its source and
carries energy
wave function mathematical model of the position of
particles of the medium
wave number
wave speed magnitude of the wave velocity
wave velocity velocity at which the disturbance
moves; also called the propagation velocity
wavelength distance between adjacent identical
parts of a wave
790 16 • Chapter Review
Intensity for a spherical wave
Equation of a standing wave
Wavelength for symmetric boundary
conditions
Frequency for symmetric boundary conditions
Summary
16.1 Traveling Waves
• A wave is a disturbance that moves from the
point of origin with a wave velocity v.
• A wave has a wavelength , which is the distance
between adjacent identical parts of the wave.
Wave velocity and wavelength are related to the
wave’s frequency and period by
• Mechanical waves are disturbances that move
through a medium and are governed by Newton’s
laws.
• Electromagnetic waves are disturbances in the
electric and magnetic fields, and do not require a
medium.
• Matter waves are a central part of quantum
mechanics and are associated with protons,
electrons, neutrons, and other fundamental
particles found in nature.
• A transverse wave has a disturbance
perpendicular to the wave’s direction of
propagation, whereas a longitudinal wave has a
disturbance parallel to its direction of
propagation.
16.2 Mathematics of Waves
• A wave is an oscillation (of a physical quantity)
that travels through a medium, accompanied by a
transfer of energy. Energy transfers from one
point to another in the direction of the wave
motion. The particles of the medium oscillate up
and down, back and forth, or both up and down
and back and forth, around an equilibrium
position.
• A snapshot of a sinusoidal wave at time
can be modeled as a function of
position. Two examples of such functions are
and
• Given a function of a wave that is a snapshot of
the wave, and is only a function of the position x,
the motion of the pulse or wave moving at a
constant velocity can be modeled with the
function, replacing x with . The minus sign
is for motion in the positive direction and the plus
sign for the negative direction.
Access for free at openstax.org
• The wave function is given by
where
is defined as the wave number, is the
angular frequency, and is the phase shift.
• The wave moves with a constant velocity ,
where the particles of the medium oscillate
about an equilibrium position. The constant
velocity of a wave can be found by
16.3 Wave Speed on a Stretched String
• The speed of a wave on a string depends on the
linear density of the string and the tension in the
string. The linear density is mass per unit length
of the string.
• In general, the speed of a wave depends on the
square root of the ratio of the elastic property to
the inertial property of the medium.
• The speed of a wave through a fluid is equal to
the square root of the ratio of the bulk modulus
of the fluid to the density of the fluid.
• The speed of sound through air at is
approximately
16.4 Energy and Power of a Wave
• The energy and power of a wave are proportional
to the square of the amplitude of the wave and
the square of the angular frequency of the wave.
• The time-averaged power of a sinusoidal wave on
a string is found by where
is the linear mass density of the string, Ais the
amplitude of the wave, is the angular
frequency of the wave, and v is the speed of the
wave.
• Intensity is defined as the power divided by the
area. In a spherical wave, the area is
and the intensity is As the wave
moves out from a source, the energy is
conserved, but the intensity decreases as the
area increases.
16.5 Interference of Waves
• Superposition is the combination of two waves at
the same location.
• Constructive interference occurs from the
2. superposition of two identical waves that are in
phase.
• Destructive interference occurs from the
superposition of two identical waves that are
out of phase.
• The wave that results from the superposition of
two sine waves that differ only by a phase shift is
a wave with an amplitude that depends on the
value of the phase difference.
16.6 Standing Waves and Resonance
• A standing wave is the superposition of two
Conceptual Questions
16.1 Traveling Waves
1. Give one example of a transverse wave and one
example of a longitudinal wave, being careful to
note the relative directions of the disturbance
and wave propagation in each.
A sinusoidal transverse wave has a wavelength
of 2.80 m. It takes 0.10 s for a portion of the
string at a position x to move from a maximum
position of to the equilibrium
position What are the period, frequency,
and wave speed of the wave?
What is the difference between propagation
speed and the frequency of a mechanical wave?
Does one or both affect wavelength? If so, how?
Consider a stretched spring, such as a slinky.
The stretched spring can support longitudinal
waves and transverse waves. How can you
produce transverse waves on the spring? How
can you produce longitudinal waves on the
spring?
Consider a wave produced on a stretched spring
by holding one end and shaking it up and down.
Does the wavelength depend on the distance
you move your hand up and down?
A sinusoidal, transverse wave is produced on a
stretched spring, having a period T . Each section
of the spring moves perpendicular to the
direction of propagation of the wave, in simple
harmonic motion with an amplitude A . Does
each section oscillate with the same period as
the wave or a different period? If the amplitude
of the transverse wave were doubled but the
period stays the same, would your answer be
the same?
An electromagnetic wave, such as light, does not
require a medium. Can you think of an example
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 16 • Chapter Review 791
waves which produces a wave that varies in
amplitude but does not propagate.
• Nodes are points of no motion in standing waves.
• An antinode is the location of maximum
amplitude of a standing wave.
• Normal modes of a wave on a string are the
possible standing wave patterns. The lowest
frequency that will produce a standing wave is
known as the fundamental frequency. The higher
frequencies which produce standing waves are
called overtones.
that would support this claim?
16.2 Mathematics of Waves
8. 9. 10. 11. If you were to shake the end of a taut spring up
and down 10 times a second, what would be the
frequency and the period of the sinusoidal wave
produced on the spring?
If you shake the end of a stretched spring up and
down with a frequency f , you can produce a
sinusoidal, transverse wave propagating down
the spring. Does the wave number depend on
the frequency you are shaking the spring?
Does the vertical speed of a segment of a
horizontal taut string through which a sinusoidal,
transverse wave is propagating depend on the
wave speed of the transverse wave?
In this section, we have considered waves that
move at a constant wave speed. Does the
medium accelerate?
If you drop a pebble in a pond you may notice
that several concentric ripples are produced, not
just a single ripple. Why do you think that is?
16.3 Wave Speed on a Stretched String
13. If the tension in a string were increased by a
factor of four, by what factor would the wave
speed of a wave on the string increase?
14. Does a sound wave move faster in seawater or fresh
water, if both the sea water and fresh water are at
the same temperature and the sound wave moves
near the surface?
12. 15. Guitars have strings of different linear mass
density. If the lowest density string and the
792 16 • Chapter Review
16. highest density string are under the same
tension, which string would support waves with
the higher wave speed?
Shown below are three waves that were sent down a
string at different times. The tension in the string
remains constant. (a) Rank the waves from the
smallest wavelength to the largest wavelength. (b)
Rank the waves from the lowest frequency to the
highest frequency.
17. 18. Electrical power lines connected by two utility
poles are sometimes heard to hum when driven
into oscillation by the wind. The speed of the
waves on the power lines depend on the tension.
What provides the tension in the power lines?
Two strings, one with a low mass density and
one with a high linear density are spliced
together. The higher density end is tied to a lab
post and a student holds the free end of the low-
mass density string. The student gives the string
a flip and sends a pulse down the strings. If the
tension is the same in both strings, does the
pulse travel at the same wave velocity in both
strings? If not, where does it travel faster, in the
low density string or the high density string?
16.4 Energy and Power of a Wave
19. Consider a string with under tension with a
constant linear mass density. A sinusoidal wave
is produced by some external driving force. If
the frequency, keeping the wave amplitude as it
was originally, how is the time-averaged power
of the wave affected? If the amplitude of the
wave is decreased by half, keeping the wave
frequency as it was originally, how is the time-
averaged power affected? Explain your answer.
Circular water waves decrease in amplitude as
they move away from where a rock is dropped.
Explain why.
In a transverse wave on a string, the motion of
the string is perpendicular to the motion of the
wave. If this is so, how is possible to move
20. 21. Access for free at openstax.org
22. 23. 24. 25. energy along the length of the string?
The energy from the sun warms the portion of
the earth facing the sun during the daylight
hours. Why are the North and South Poles cold
while the equator is quite warm?
The intensity of a spherical waves decreases as
the wave moves away from the source. If the
intensity of the wave at the source is how far
from the source will the intensity decrease by a
factor of nine?
16.5 Interference of Waves
An incident sinusoidal wave is sent along a string
that is fixed to the wall with a wave speed of v.
The wave reflects off the end of the string.
Describe the reflected wave.
A string of a length of 2.00 m with a linear mass
density of is attached to the
end of a 2.00-m-long string with a linear mass
density of The free end of the
higher-density string is fixed to the wall, and a
student holds the free end of the low-density
string, keeping the tension constant in both
strings. The student sends a pulse down the
string. Describe what happens at the interface
between the two strings.
A long, tight spring is held by two students, one
student holding each end. Each student gives
the end a flip sending one wavelength of a
sinusoidal wave down the spring in opposite
directions. When the waves meet in the middle,
what does the wave look like?
Many of the topics discussed in this chapter are
useful beyond the topics of mechanical waves. It is
hard to conceive of a mechanical wave with sharp
corners, but you could encounter such a wave form
in your digital electronics class, as shown below.
This could be a signal from a device known as an
analog to digital converter, in which a continuous
voltage signal is converted into a discrete signal or a
digital recording of sound. What is the result of the
superposition of the two signals?
26. 27. 
16 • Chapter Review 793
28. 16.6 Standing Waves and Resonance
29. 30. 31. 32. 33. A truck manufacturer finds that a strut in the
engine is failing prematurely. A sound engineer
determines that the strut resonates at the
frequency of the engine and suspects that this
could be the problem. What are two possible
characteristics of the strut can be modified to
correct the problem?
Why do roofs of gymnasiums and churches seem
to fail more than family homes when an
earthquake occurs?
Wine glasses can be set into resonance by
moistening your finger and rubbing it around the
rim of the glass. Why?
Air conditioning units are sometimes placed on
the roof of homes in the city. Occasionally, the
air conditioners cause an undesirable hum
throughout the upper floors of the homes. Why
does this happen? What can be done to reduce
the hum?
Consider a standing wave modeled as
Is
What
there a node or an antinode at about a standing wave modeled as
Is there a node or an antinode at the
position?
A string of a constant linear mass density is held
taut by two students, each holding one end. The
tension in the string is constant. The students
each send waves down the string by wiggling the
string. (a) Is it possible for the waves to have
different wave speeds? (b) Is it possible for the
waves to have different frequencies? (c) Is it
possible for the waves to have different
wavelengths?
Problems
16.1 Traveling Waves
34. Storms in the South Pacific can create waves
that travel all the way to the California coast,
12,000 km away. How long does it take them to
travel this distance if they travel at 15.0 m/s?
Waves on a swimming pool propagate at 0.75 m/
s. You splash the water at one end of the pool
and observe the wave go to the opposite end,
reflect, and return in 30.00 s. How far away is
the other end of the pool?
Wind gusts create ripples on the ocean that have
a wavelength of 5.00 cm and propagate at 2.00
m/s. What is their frequency?
How many times a minute does a boat bob up
and down on ocean waves that have a
wavelength of 40.0 m and a propagation speed
of 5.00 m/s?
Scouts at a camp shake the rope bridge they
have just crossed and observe the wave crests
39. 35. 36. 40. 41. 37. 42. 38. to be 8.00 m apart. If they shake the bridge
twice per second, what is the propagation speed
of the waves?
What is the wavelength of the waves you create
in a swimming pool if you splash your hand at a
rate of 2.00 Hz and the waves propagate at a
wave speed of 0.800 m/s?
What is the wavelength of an earthquake that
shakes you with a frequency of 10.0 Hz and gets
to another city 84.0 km away in 12.0 s?
Radio waves transmitted through empty space
at the speed of light
by the V o y ag er spacecraft have a wavelength of
0.120 m. What is their frequency?
Your ear is capable of differentiating sounds that
arrive at each ear just 0.34 ms apart, which is
useful in determining where low frequency
sound is originating from. (a) Suppose a low-
frequency sound source is placed to the right of
794 16 • Chapter Review
43. 44. 45. a person, whose ears are approximately 18 cm
apart, and the speed of sound generated is 340
m/s. How long is the interval between when the
sound arrives at the right ear and the sound
arrives at the left ear? (b) Assume the same
person was scuba diving and a low-frequency
sound source was to the right of the scuba diver.
How long is the interval between when the
sound arrives at the right ear and the sound
arrives at the left ear, if the speed of sound in
water is 1500 m/s? (c) What is significant about
the time interval of the two situations?
(a) Seismographs measure the arrival times of
earthquakes with a precision of 0.100 s. To get
the distance to the epicenter of the quake,
geologists compare the arrival times of S- and P-
waves, which travel at different speeds. If S- and
P-waves arrive at 4.00 and 7.20 km/s,
respectively, in the region considered, how
precisely can the distance to the source of the
earthquake be determined? (b) Seismic waves
from underground detonations of nuclear bombs
can be used to locate the test site and detect
violations of test bans. Discuss whether your
answer to (a) implies a serious limit to such
detection. (Note also that the uncertainty is
greater if there is an uncertainty in the
propagation speeds of the S- and P-waves.)
A Girl Scout is taking a 10.00-km hike to earn a
merit badge. While on the hike, she sees a cliff
some distance away. She wishes to estimate the
time required to walk to the cliff. She knows that
the speed of sound is approximately 343 meters
per second. She yells and finds that the echo
returns after approximately 2.00 seconds. If she
can hike 1.00 km in 10 minutes, how long would
it take her to reach the cliff?
A quality assurance engineer at a frying pan
company is asked to qualify a new line of
nonstick-coated frying pans. The coating needs
to be 1.00 mm thick. One method to test the
thickness is for the engineer to pick a
percentage of the pans manufactured, strip off
the coating, and measure the thickness using a
micrometer. This method is a destructive testing
method. Instead, the engineer decides that
every frying pan will be tested using a
nondestructive method. An ultrasonic
transducer is used that produces sound waves
with a frequency of The sound
waves are sent through the coating and are
reflected by the interface between the coating
Access for free at openstax.org
46. and the metal pan, and the time is recorded. The
wavelength of the ultrasonic waves in the
coating is 0.076 m. What should be the time
recorded if the coating is the correct thickness
(1.00 mm)?
16.2 Mathematics of Waves
A pulse can be described as a single wave
disturbance that moves through a medium.
Consider a pulse that is defined at time
by the equation
centered around The pulse moves
with a velocity of in the positive
x-direction. (a) What is the amplitude of the
pulse? (b) What is the equation of the pulse as a
function of position and time? (c) Where is the
pulse centered at time ?
A transverse wave on a string is modeled with the wave
function
What is the height of the string with respect to the
equilibrium position at a position 47. and a time
48. Consider the wave function
What are the period, wavelength, speed, and initial
phase shift of the wave modeled by the wave function?
49. A pulse is defined as
Use a
spreadsheet, or other computer program, to plot
the pulse as the height of medium y as a
function of position x. Plot the pulse at times
and on the same graph.
Where is the pulse centered at time ?
Use your spreadsheet to check your answer.
50. A wave is modeled at time with a
wave function that depends on position. The
equation is .
The wave travels a distance of 4.00 meters in
0.50 s in the positive x-direction. Write an
equation for the wave as a function of position
and time.
51. A wave is modeled with the function
52. Find the (a) amplitude, (b) wave number, (c) angular
frequency, (d) wave speed, (e) initial phase shift, (f)
wavelength, and (g) period of the wave.
A surface ocean wave has an amplitude of 0.60
53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. m and the distance from trough to trough is 8.00
m. It moves at a constant wave speed of 1.50
m/s propagating in the positive x-direction. At
the water displacement at is zero,
and is positive. (a) Assuming the wave can be
modeled as a sine wave, write a wave function to
model the wave. (b) Use a spreadsheet to plot
the wave function at times and
on the same graph. Verify that the
wave moves 3.00 m in those 2.00 s.
A wave is modeled by the wave function
What are the amplitude, wavelength, wave
speed, period, and frequency of the wave?
A transverse wave on a string is described with
the wave function
.
(a) What is the wave velocity of the wave? (b)
What is the magnitude of the maximum velocity of
the string perpendicular to the direction of the
motion?
A swimmer in the ocean observes one day that
the ocean surface waves are periodic and
resemble a sine wave. The swimmer estimates
that the vertical distance between the crest and
the trough of each wave is approximately 0.45
m, and the distance between each crest is
approximately 1.8 m. The swimmer counts that
12 waves pass every two minutes. Determine
the simple harmonic wave function that would
describes these waves.
Consider a wave described by the wave function
(a) How many crests pass by an observer at a
fixed location in 2.00 minutes? (b) How far has
the wave traveled in that time?
Consider two waves defined by the wave
functions
and
What are the similarities and differences
between the two waves?
Consider two waves defined by the wave
functions
and
What are the similarities and differences
between the two waves?
16 • Chapter Review 795
59. 61. 62. 63. The speed of a transverse wave on a string is
300.00 m/s, its wavelength is 0.50 m, and the
amplitude is 20.00 cm. How much time is
required for a particle on the string to move
through a distance of 5.00 km?
16.3 Wave Speed on a Stretched String
60. Transverse waves are sent along a 5.00-m-long
string with a speed of 30.00 m/s. The string is
under a tension of 10.00 N. What is the mass of
the string?
A copper wire has a density of
a radius of 1.20 mm, and a length L . The wire is
held under a tension of 10.00 N. Transverse
waves are sent down the wire. (a) What is the
linear mass density of the wire? (b) What is the
speed of the waves through the wire?
A piano wire has a linear mass density of
Under what tension
must the string be kept to produce waves with a
wave speed of 500.00 m/s?
A string with a linear mass density of
is tied to the ceiling. A 20-kg
mass is tied to the free end of the string. The
string is plucked, sending a pulse down the
string. Estimate the speed of the pulse as it
moves down the string.
A cord has a linear mass density of
and a length of three meters.
The cord is plucked and it takes 0.20 s for the
pulse to reach the end of the string. What is the
tension of the string?
A string is 3.00 m long with a mass of 5.00 g.
The string is held taut with a tension of 500.00 N
applied to the string. A pulse is sent down the
string. How long does it take the pulse to travel
the 3.00 m of the string?
Two strings are attached to poles, however the
first string is twice as long as the second. If both
strings have the same tension and mu, what is
the ratio of the speed of the pulse of the wave
from the first string to the second string?
Two strings are attached to poles, however the
first string is twice the linear mass density mu of
the second. If both strings have the same
tension, what is the ratio of the speed of the
pulse of the wave from the first string to the
second string?
Transverse waves travel through a string where
64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 
796 16 • Chapter Review
69. the tension equals 7.00 N with a speed of 20.00
m/s. What tension would be required for a wave
speed of 25.00 m/s?
Two strings are attached between two poles
separated by a distance of 2.00 m as shown below,
both under the same tension of 600.00 N. String 1
has a linear density of and string
2 has a linear mass density of
Transverse wave pulses are generated
simultaneously at opposite ends of the strings. How
much time passes before the pulses pass one
another?
70. 71. 72. Two strings are attached between two poles
separated by a distance of 2.00 meters as
shown in the preceding figure, both strings have
a linear density of the
tension in string 1 is 600.00 N and the tension in
string 2 is 700.00 N. Transverse wave pulses are
generated simultaneously at opposite ends of
the strings. How much time passes before the
pulses pass one another?
The note is played on a piano and has a
frequency of If the linear mass
density of this string of the piano is
and the string is under a
tension of 1000.00 N, what is the speed of the
wave on the string and the wavelength of the
wave?
Two transverse waves travel through a taut string.
The speed of each wave is the vertical position as a function of the horizontal
position is shown below for the time A plot of
(a)
What is the wavelength of each wave? (b) What is
the frequency of each wave? (c) What is the
maximum vertical speed of each string?
Access for free at openstax.org
73. 74. A sinusoidal wave travels down a taut, horizontal
string with a linear mass density of
. The maximum vertical speed
The wave is
of the wave is modeled with the wave equation
(a)
What is the amplitude of the wave? (b) What is
the tension in the string?
The speed of a transverse wave on a string is
and the tension in the string is
. What must the tension be to
increase the speed of the wave to
16.4 Energy and Power of a Wave
75. A string of length 5 m and a mass of 90 g is held
under a tension of 100 N. A wave travels down the
string that is modeled as
What is the power over one wavelength?
76. Ultrasound of intensity is
produced by the rectangular head of a medical
imaging device measuring 3.00 cm by 5.00 cm.
What is its power output?
77. 78. 79. 80. The low-frequency speaker of a stereo set has a
surface area of and produces 1 W
of acoustical power. (a) What is the intensity at
the speaker? (b) If the speaker projects sound
uniformly in all directions, at what distance from
the speaker is the intensity ?
To increase the intensity of a wave by a factor of
50, by what factor should the amplitude be
increased?
A device called an insolation meter is used to
measure the intensity of sunlight. It has an area
of and registers 6.50 W. What is the
intensity in ?
Energy from the Sun arrives at the top of Earth’s
atmosphere with an intensity of .
How long does it take for to arrive
on an area of ?
81. Suppose you have a device that extracts energy
from ocean breakers in direct proportion to their
intensity. If the device produces 10.0 kW of
power on a day when the breakers are 1.20 m
high, how much will it produce when they are
0.600 m high?
82. A photovoltaic array of (solar cells) is
efficient in gathering solar energy and converting
it to electricity. If the average intensity of
sunlight on one day is , what area
should your array have to gather energy at the
rate of 100 W? (b) What is the maximum cost of
the array if it must pay for itself in two years of
operation averaging 10.0 hours per day?
Assume that it earns money at the rate of 9.00
cents per kilowatt-hour.
83. A microphone receiving a pure sound tone feeds
an oscilloscope, producing a wave on its screen.
If the sound intensity is originally
, but is turned up until the
, what is the new
amplitude increases by intensity?
84. A string with a mass of 0.30 kg has a length of
4.00 m. If the tension in the string is 50.00 N,
and a sinusoidal wave with an amplitude of 2.00
cm is induced on the string, what must the
frequency be for an average power of 100.00 W?
85. The power versus time for a point on a string
in which a sinusoidal traveling
wave is induced. The wave is modeled with the
wave equation
. What is the
frequency and amplitude of the wave?
86. A string is under tension . Energy is
transmitted by a wave on the string at rate a wave of frequency . What is the ratio of the
new energy transmission rate to if the
tension is doubled?
by
87. A 250-Hz tuning fork is struck and the intensity
at the source is at a distance of one meter
from the source. (a) What is the intensity at a
distance of 4.00 m from the source? (b) How far
from the tuning fork is the intensity a tenth of
the intensity at the source?
88. A sound speaker is rated at a voltage of
and a current of
Electrical power consumption is . To test
the speaker, a signal of a sine wave is applied to
the speaker. Assuming that the sound wave
16 • Chapter Review 797
89. moves as a spherical wave and that all of the
energy applied to the speaker is converted to
sound energy, how far from the speaker is the
intensity equal to
The energy of a ripple on a pond is proportional
to the amplitude squared. If the amplitude of the
ripple is 0.1 cm at a distance from the source of
6.00 meters, what was the amplitude at a
distance of 2.00 meters from the source?
16.5 Interference of Waves
90. 91. 92. 93. Consider two sinusoidal waves traveling along a
string, modeled as
and
What
is the height of the resultant wave formed by the
interference of the two waves at the position
at time
Consider two sinusoidal sine waves traveling
along a string, modeled as
and
What is the height of the resultant wave formed
by the interference of the two waves at the
position at time
Consider two sinusoidal sine waves traveling
along a string, modeled as
and
What
is the wave function of the resulting wave? [Hint:
Use the trig identity
Two sinusoidal waves are moving through a
medium in the same direction, both having
amplitudes of 3.00 cm, a wavelength of 5.20 m,
and a period of 6.52 s, but one has a phase shift
of an angle . What is the phase shift if the
resultant wave has an amplitude of 5.00 cm?
[Hint: Use the trig identity
94. 95. Two sinusoidal waves are moving through a
medium in the positive x-direction, both having
amplitudes of 6.00 cm, a wavelength of 4.3 m,
and a period of 6.00 s, but one has a phase shift
of an angle What is the height of
the resultant wave at a time and a
position ?
Two sinusoidal waves are moving through a
medium in the positive x-direction, both having
101. 798 16 • Chapter Review
amplitudes of 7.00 cm, a wave number of
an angular frequency of
and a period of 6.00 s, but one
has a phase shift of an angle What
is the height of the resultant wave at a time
and a position
96. Consider two waves and that
are identical except for a phase shift propagating
in the same medium. (a)What is the phase shift,
in radians, if the amplitude of the resulting wave
is 1.75 times the amplitude of the individual
waves? (b) What is the phase shift in degrees?
(c) What is the phase shift as a percentage of the
individual wavelength?
97. Two sinusoidal waves, which are identical except
for a phase shift, travel along in the same
direction. The wave equation of the resultant
wave is
What are the angular frequency, wave
number, amplitude, and phase shift of the
individual waves?
103. 98. Two sinusoidal waves, which are identical except for a
phase shift, travel along in the same direction. The wave
equation of the resultant wave is
104. What are the period, wavelength, amplitude, and phase
shift of the individual waves?
99. Consider two wave functions,
and
four waves as a function of position where the
range of x is from 0 to 12 m.
Consider two wave functions that differ only by a
phase shift, and
Use the
trigonometric identities
and
to find a wave equation for
the wave resulting from the superposition of the
two waves. Does the resulting wave function
come as a surprise to you?
16.6 Standing Waves and Resonance
102. A wave traveling on a Slinky® that is stretched to
4 m takes 2.4 s to travel the length of the Slinky
and back again. (a) What is the speed of the
wave? (b) Using the same Slinky stretched to the
same length, a standing wave is created which
consists of three antinodes and four nodes. At
what frequency must the Slinky be oscillating?
A 2-m long string is stretched between two
supports with a tension that produces a wave
speed equal to What are the
wavelength and frequency of the first three
modes that resonate on the string?
Consider the experimental setup shown below. The
length of the string between the string vibrator and
the pulley is The linear density of the
string is The string vibrator can
oscillate at any frequency. The hanging mass is 2.00
kg. (a)What are the wavelength and frequency of
mode? (b) The string oscillates the air around
the string. What is the wavelength of the sound if the
speed of the sound is
(a) Using a spreadsheet, plot the two wave
functions and the wave that results from the
superposition of the two wave functions as a
function of position for the
time (b) What are the wavelength and
amplitude of the two original waves? (c) What
are the wavelength and amplitude of the
resulting wave?
100. Consider two wave functions,
and
(a) Verify that
is the
solution for the wave that results from a
superposition of the two waves. Make a column
for x, , , , and
Plot
105. A cable with a linear density of hung from telephone poles. The tension in the
cable is 500.00 N. The distance between poles
is 20 meters. The wind blows across the line,
causing the cable resonate. A standing waves
pattern is produced that has 4.5 wavelengths
is
Access for free at openstax.org
106. between the two poles. The speed of sound at
the current temperature is
. What are the frequency and
wavelength of the hum?
Consider a rod of length L , mounted in the center
to a support. A node must exist where the rod is
mounted on a support, as shown below. Draw
the first two normal modes of the rod as it is
driven into resonance. Label the wavelength and
the frequency required to drive the rod into
resonance.
107. Consider two wave functions
108. 109. 110. 111. and
. Write
a wave function for the resulting standing wave.
A 2.40-m wire has a mass of 7.50 g and is under
a tension of 160 N. The wire is held rigidly at
both ends and set into oscillation. (a) What is the
speed of waves on the wire? The string is driven
into resonance by a frequency that produces a
standing wave with a wavelength equal to 1.20
m. (b) What is the frequency used to drive the
string into resonance?
A string with a linear mass density of 0.0062
kg/m and a length of 3.00 m is set into the
mode of resonance. The tension in the
string is 20.00 N. What is the wavelength and
frequency of the wave?
A string with a linear mass density of 0.0075
kg/m and a length of 6.00 m is set into the
mode of resonance by driving with a frequency
of 100.00 Hz. What is the tension in the string?
Two sinusoidal waves with identical wavelengths
Additional Problems
117. Ultrasound equipment used in the medical
profession uses sound waves of a frequency
above the range of human hearing. If the
frequency of the sound produced by the
ultrasound machine is what is the
wavelength of the ultrasound in bone, if the
speed of sound in bone is
112. 113. 114. 115. 116. 118. 16 • Chapter Review 799
and amplitudes travel in opposite directions
along a string producing a standing wave. The
linear mass density of the string is
and the tension in the string is
The time interval between
instances of total destructive interference is
What is the wavelength of the
waves?
A string, fixed on both ends, is 5.00 m long and
has a mass of 0.15 kg. The tension if the string is
90 N. The string is vibrating to produce a
standing wave at the fundamental frequency of
the string. (a) What is the speed of the waves on
the string? (b) What is the wavelength of the
standing wave produced? (c) What is the period
of the standing wave?
A string is fixed at both end. The mass of the
string is 0.0090 kg and the length is 3.00 m. The
string is under a tension of 200.00 N. The string
is driven by a variable frequency source to
produce standing waves on the string. Find the
wavelengths and frequency of the first four
modes of standing waves.
The frequencies of two successive modes of
standing waves on a string are 258.36 Hz and
301.42 Hz. What is the next frequency above
100.00 Hz that would produce a standing wave?
A string is fixed at both ends to supports 3.50 m
apart and has a linear mass density of
The string is under a tension of
90.00 N. A standing wave is produced on the
string with six nodes and five antinodes. What
are the wave speed, wavelength, frequency, and
period of the standing wave?
Sine waves are sent down a 1.5-m-long string
fixed at both ends. The waves reflect back in the
opposite direction. The amplitude of the wave is
4.00 cm. The propagation velocity of the waves
is 175 m/s. The resonance mode of the
string is produced. Write an equation for the
resulting standing wave.
Shown below is the plot of a wave function that
models a wave at time and .
The dotted line is the wave function at time
and the solid line is the function at time
. Estimate the amplitude, wavelength,
velocity, and period of the wave.
800 16 • Chapter Review
119. 120. 121. 122. 123. 124. The speed of light in air is approximately
and the speed of light in
glass is . A red laser with a
wavelength of shines light
incident of the glass, and some of the red light is
transmitted to the glass. The frequency of the
light is the same for the air and the glass. (a)
What is the frequency of the light? (b) What is
the wavelength of the light in the glass?
A radio station broadcasts radio waves at a
frequency of 101.7 MHz. The radio waves move
through the air at approximately the speed of
light in a vacuum. What is the wavelength of the
radio waves?
A sunbather stands waist deep in the ocean and
observes that six crests of periodic surface
waves pass each minute. The crests are 16.00
meters apart. What is the wavelength,
frequency, period, and speed of the waves?
A tuning fork vibrates producing sound at a
frequency of 512 Hz. The speed of sound of
sound in air is if the air is at a
temperature of . What is the wavelength
of the sound?
A motorboat is traveling across a lake at a speed
of The boat bounces up and
down every 0.50 s as it travels in the same
direction as a wave. It bounces up and down
every 0.30 s as it travels in a direction opposite
the direction of the waves. What is the speed
and wavelength of the wave?
Use the linear wave equation to show that the
wave speed of a wave modeled with the wave
function
is What are the wavelength and
the speed of the wave?
125. Given the wave functions
and
with ,
Access for free at openstax.org
126. 127. 128. 129. 130. 131. show that is a solution to the
linear wave equation with a wave velocity of
A transverse wave on a string is modeled with the wave
function
.
(a) Find the wave velocity. (b) Find the position in the
y-direction, the velocity perpendicular to the motion of
the wave, and the acceleration perpendicular to the
motion of the wave, of a small segment of the string
centered at at time
A sinusoidal wave travels down a taut, horizontal
string with a linear mass density of
The magnitude of maximum
vertical acceleration of the wave is
and the amplitude of the
wave is 0.40 m. The string is under a tension of
. The wave moves in the
negative x-direction. Write an equation to model
the wave.
A transverse wave on a string
is described with the
equation
What is the tension under which the string is
held taut?
A transverse wave on a horizontal string
is described with the
equation
The
string is under a tension of 300.00 N. What are
the wave speed, wave number, and angular
frequency of the wave?
A student holds an inexpensive sonic range
finder and uses the range finder to find the
distance to the wall. The sonic range finder
emits a sound wave. The sound wave reflects off
the wall and returns to the range finder. The
round trip takes 0.012 s. The range finder was
calibrated for use at room temperature
, but the temperature in the room is
actually Assuming that the timing
mechanism is perfect, what percentage of error
can the student expect due to the calibration?
A wave on a string is driven by a string vibrator,
which oscillates at a frequency of 100.00 Hz and
an amplitude of 1.00 cm. The string vibrator
operates at a voltage of 12.00 V and a current of
0.20 A. The power consumed by the string
132. 133. 134. 135. 136. 137. vibrator is . Assume that the string
vibrator is efficient at converting electrical
energy into the energy associated with the
vibrations of the string. The string is 3.00 m
long, and is under a tension of 60.00 N. What is
the linear mass density of the string?
A traveling wave on a string is modeled by the wave
equation
The string has a linear mass density of
What is the average power
transferred by the wave on the string?
A transverse wave on a string has a wavelength
of 5.0 m, a period of 0.02 s, and an amplitude of
1.5 cm. The average power transferred by the
wave is 5.00 W. What is the tension in the string?
(a) What is the intensity of a laser beam used to
burn away cancerous tissue that, when
absorbed, puts 500.0 J of energy into a circular
spot 2.00 mm in diameter in 4.00 s? (b) Discuss
how this intensity compares to the average
intensity of sunlight (about ) and the
implications that would have if the laser beam
entered your eye. Note how your answer
depends on the time duration of the exposure.
Consider two periodic wave functions,
and
(a) For what
values of will the wave that results from a
superposition of the wave functions have an
amplitude of 2A ? (b) For what values of will
the wave that results from a superposition of the
wave functions have an amplitude of zero?
Consider two periodic wave functions,
and
. (a) For what
values of will the wave that results from a
superposition of the wave functions have an
amplitude of 2A ? (b) For what values of will
the wave that results from a superposition of the
wave functions have an amplitude of zero?
A trough with dimensions 10.00 meters by 0.10
meters by 0.10 meters is partially filled with
water. Small-amplitude surface water waves are
produced from both ends of the trough by
paddles oscillating in simple harmonic motion.
The height of the water waves are modeled with
two sinusoidal wave equations,
and
138. 139. 140. 141. 16 • Chapter Review 801
What is the wave function of the resulting wave
after the waves reach one another and before
they reach the end of the trough (i.e., assume
that there are only two waves in the trough and
ignore reflections)? Use a spreadsheet to check
your results. (Hint: Use the trig identities
and
A seismograph records the S- and P-waves from
an earthquake 20.00 s apart. If they traveled the
same path at constant wave speeds of
and how far
away is the epicenter of the earthquake?
Consider what is shown below. A 20.00-kg mass
rests on a frictionless ramp inclined at . A
string with a linear mass density of
is attached to the 20.00-kg
mass. The string passes over a frictionless pulley
of negligible mass and is attached to a hanging
mass (m). The system is in static equilibrium. A
wave is induced on the string and travels up the
ramp. (a) What is the mass of the hanging mass
(m)? (b) At what wave speed does the wave
travel up the string?
Consider the superposition of three wave
functions
and
What
is the height of the resulting wave at position
at time
A string has a mass of 150 g and a length of 3.4
m. One end of the string is fixed to a lab stand
and the other is attached to a spring with a
spring constant of The free end
of the spring is attached to another lab pole. The
tension in the string is maintained by the spring.
The lab poles are separated by a distance that
802 16 • Chapter Review
stretches the spring 2.00 cm. The string is
plucked and a pulse travels along the string.
What is the propagation speed of the pulse?
142. A standing wave is produced on a string under a
tension of 70.0 N by two sinusoidal transverse
waves that are identical, but moving in opposite
directions. The string is fixed at and
Nodes appear at 2.00
m, 4.00 m, 6.00 m, 8.00 m, and 10.00 m. The
amplitude of the standing wave is 3.00 cm. It
takes 0.10 s for the antinodes to make one
complete oscillation. (a) What are the wave
functions of the two sine waves that produce the
Challenge Problems
144. A copper wire has a radius of and a
length of 5.0 m. The wire is placed under a
tension of 3000 N and the wire stretches by a
small amount. The wire is plucked and a pulse
travels down the wire. What is the propagation
speed of the pulse? (Assume the temperature
does not change:
145. 146. A pulse moving along the x axis can be modeled
as the wave function
(a)What
are the direction and propagation speed of the
pulse? (b) How far has the wave moved in 3.00
s? (c) Plot the pulse using a spreadsheet at time
and to verify your answer in
part (b).
A string with a linear mass density of
is fixed at both ends. A 5.0-kg
mass is hung from the string, as shown below. If a
pulse is sent along section A , what is the wave
speed in section Aand the wave speed in section B ?
Access for free at openstax.org
143. standing wave? (b) What are the maximum
velocity and acceleration of the string,
perpendicular to the direction of motion of the
transverse waves, at the antinodes?
A string with a length of 4 m is held under a
constant tension. The string has a linear mass
density of Two resonant
frequencies of the string are 400 Hz and 480 Hz.
There are no resonant frequencies between the
two frequencies. (a) What are the wavelengths
of the two resonant modes? (b) What is the
tension in the string?
147. Consider two wave functions
148. and
. What is the
wave function resulting from the interference of
the two wave? (Hint:
and
.)
The wave function that models a standing wave
is given as
. What are two wave
functions that interfere to form this wave
function? Plot the two wave functions and the
sum of the sum of the two wave functions at
to verify your answer.
149. Consider two wave functions
and
. The resultant
wave form when you add the two functions is
Consider the case where
, and . (a)
Where are the first three nodes of the standing
16 • Chapter Review 803
wave function starting at zero and moving in the
positive x direction? (b) Using a spreadsheet,
plot the two wave functions and the resulting
function at time to verify your answer.
804 16 • Chapter Review
Access for free at openstax.org
CHAPTER 17
Sound
FIGURE 17.1 Hearing is an important human sense that can detect frequencies of sound, ranging between 20 Hz and 20 kHz. However,
other species have very different ranges of hearing. Bats, for example, emit clicks in ultrasound, using frequencies beyond 20 kHz. They
can detect nearby insects by hearing the echo of these ultrasonic clicks. Ultrasound is important in several human applications, including
probing the interior structures of human bodies, Earth, and the Sun. Ultrasound is also useful in industry for nondestructive testing.
(credit: modification of work by Derek Keats/flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1 Sound Waves
17.2 Speed of Sound
17.3 Sound Intensity
17.4 Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave
17.5 Sources of Musical Sound
17.6 Beats
17.7 The Doppler Effect
17.8 Shock Waves
INTRODUCTION
Sound is an example of a mechanical wave, specifically, a pressure wave: Sound waves travel
through the air and other media as oscillations of molecules. Normal human hearing encompasses an impressive
range of frequencies from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. Sounds below 20 Hz are called infrasound, whereas those above 20 kHz
are called ultrasound. Some animals, like the bat shown in Figure 17.1, can hear sounds in the ultrasonic range.
Many of the concepts covered in Waves also have applications in the study of sound. For example, when a sound
806 17 • Sound
wave encounters an interface between two media with different wave speeds, reflection and transmission of the
wave occur.
Ultrasound has many uses in science, engineering, and medicine. Ultrasound is used for nondestructive testing in
engineering, such as testing the thickness of coating on metal. In medicine, sound waves are far less destructive
than X-rays and can be used to image the fetus in a mother’s womb without danger to the fetus or the mother. Later
in this chapter, we discuss the Doppler effect, which can be used to determine the velocity of blood in the arteries or
wind speed in weather systems.
17.1 Sound Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between sound and hearing
• Describe sound as a wave
• List the equations used to model sound waves
• Describe compression and rarefactions as they relate to sound
The physical phenomenon of sound is a disturbance of matter that is transmitted from its source outward. Hearing
is the perception of sound, just as seeing is the perception of visible light. On the atomic scale, sound is a
disturbance of atoms that is far more ordered than their thermal motions. In many instances, sound is a periodic
wave, and the atoms undergo simple harmonic motion. Thus, sound waves can induce oscillations and resonance
effects (Figure 17.2).
FIGURE 17.2 This glass has been shattered by a high-intensity sound wave of the same frequency as the resonant frequency of the glass.
(credit: “||read||”/Flickr)
INTERACTIVE
This video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21waveswineglas) shows waves on the surface of a wine glass, being driven by
sound waves from a speaker. As the frequency of the sound wave approaches the resonant frequency of the wine
glass, the amplitude and frequency of the waves on the wine glass increase. When the resonant frequency is
reached, the glass shatters.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.1 • Sound Waves 807
A speaker produces a sound wave by oscillating a cone, causing vibrations of air molecules. In Figure 17.3, a
speaker vibrates at a constant frequency and amplitude, producing vibrations in the surrounding air molecules. As
the speaker oscillates back and forth, it transfers energy to the air, mostly as thermal energy. But a small part of the
speaker’s energy goes into compressing and expanding the surrounding air, creating slightly higher and lower local
pressures. These compressions (high-pressure regions) and rarefactions (low-pressure regions) move out as
longitudinal pressure waves having the same frequency as the speaker—they are the disturbance that is a sound
wave. (Sound waves in air and most fluids are longitudinal, because fluids have almost no shear strength. In solids,
sound waves can be both transverse and longitudinal.)
Figure 17.3(a) shows the compressions and rarefactions, and also shows a graph of gauge pressure versus distance
from a speaker. As the speaker moves in the positive x-direction, it pushes air molecules, displacing them from their
equilibrium positions. As the speaker moves in the negative x-direction, the air molecules move back toward their
equilibrium positions due to a restoring force. The air molecules oscillate in simple harmonic motion about their
equilibrium positions, as shown in part (b). Note that sound waves in air are longitudinal, and in the figure, the wave
propagates in the positive x-direction and the molecules oscillate parallel to the direction in which the wave
propagates.
FIGURE 17.3 (a) A vibrating cone of a speaker, moving in the positive x-direction, compresses the air in front of it and expands the air
behind it. As the speaker oscillates, it creates another compression and rarefaction as those on the right move away from the speaker. After
many vibrations, a series of compressions and rarefactions moves out from the speaker as a sound wave. The red graph shows the gauge
pressure of the air versus the distance from the speaker. Pressures vary only slightly from atmospheric pressure for ordinary sounds. Note
that gauge pressure is modeled with a sine function, where the crests of the function line up with the compressions and the troughs line up
with the rarefactions. (b) Sound waves can also be modeled using the displacement of the air molecules. The blue graph shows the
displacement of the air molecules versus the position from the speaker and is modeled with a cosine function. Notice that the displacement
is zero for the molecules in their equilibrium position and are centered at the compressions and rarefactions. Compressions are formed
when molecules on either side of the equilibrium molecules are displaced toward the equilibrium position. Rarefactions are formed when
the molecules are displaced away from the equilibrium position.
MODELS DESCRIBING SOUND
Sound can be modeled as a pressure wave by considering the change in pressure from average pressure,
17.1
This equation is similar to the periodic wave equations seen in Waves, where is the maximum change in pressure, is the wave number, frequency, and is the initial phase. The wave speed can be determined from is the change in pressure,
is the angular
Sound waves can
also be modeled in terms of the displacement of the air molecules. The displacement of the air molecules can
be modeled using a cosine function:
17.2
808 17 • Sound
In this equation, s is the displacement and is the maximum displacement.
Not shown in the figure is the amplitude of a sound wave as it decreases with distance from its source, because the
energy of the wave is spread over a larger and larger area. The intensity decreases as it moves away from the
speaker, as discussed in Waves. The energy is also absorbed by objects and converted into thermal energy by the
viscosity of the air. In addition, during each compression, a little heat transfers to the air; during each rarefaction,
even less heat transfers from the air, and these heat transfers reduce the organized disturbance into random
thermal motions. Whether the heat transfer from compression to rarefaction is significant depends on how far apart
they are—that is, it depends on wavelength. Wavelength, frequency, amplitude, and speed of propagation are
important characteristics for sound, as they are for all waves.
17.2 Speed of Sound
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the relationship between wavelength and frequency of sound
• Determine the speed of sound in different media
• Derive the equation for the speed of sound in air
• Determine the speed of sound in air for a given temperature
Sound, like all waves, travels at a certain speed and has the properties of frequency and wavelength. You can
observe direct evidence of the speed of sound while watching a fireworks display (Figure 17.4). You see the flash of
an explosion well before you hear its sound and possibly feel the pressure wave, implying both that sound travels at
a finite speed and that it is much slower than light.
FIGURE 17.4 When a firework shell explodes, we perceive the light energy before the sound energy because sound travels more slowly
than light does.
The difference between the speed of light and the speed of sound can also be experienced during an electrical
storm. The flash of lighting is often seen before the clap of thunder. You may have heard that if you count the
number of seconds between the flash and the sound, you can estimate the distance to the source. Every five
seconds converts to about one mile. The velocity of any wave is related to its frequency and wavelength by
17.3
Access for free at openstax.org
17.2 • Speed of Sound 809
where v is the speed of the wave, fis its frequency, and is its wavelength. Recall from Waves that the wavelength is
the length of the wave as measured between sequential identical points. For example, for a surface water wave or
sinusoidal wave on a string, the wavelength can be measured between any two convenient sequential points with
the same height and slope, such as between two sequential crests or two sequential troughs. Similarly, the
wavelength of a sound wave is the distance between sequential identical parts of a wave—for example, between
sequential compressions (Figure 17.5). The frequency is the same as that of the source and is the number of waves
that pass a point per unit time.
FIGURE 17.5 A sound wave emanates from a source, such as a tuning fork, vibrating at a frequency f . It propagates at speed v and has a
wavelength .
Speed of Sound in Various Media
Table 17.1 shows that the speed of sound varies greatly in different media. The speed of sound in a medium
depends on how quickly vibrational energy can be transferred through the medium. For this reason, the derivation of
the speed of sound in a medium depends on the medium and on the state of the medium. In general, the equation
for the speed of a mechanical wave in a medium depends on the square root of the restoring force, or the elastic
property, divided by the inertial property,
Also, sound waves satisfy the wave equation derived in Waves,
Recall from Waves that the speed of a wave on a string is equal to tension in the string and the linear density the bulk modulus and the density,
where the restoring force is the
is the inertial property. In a fluid, the speed of sound depends on
17.4
The speed of sound in a solid depends on the Young’s modulus of the medium and the density,
17.5
810 17 • Sound
In an ideal gas (see The Kinetic Theory of Gases (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-2/pages/
2-introduction)), the equation for the speed of sound is
17.6
where is the adiabatic index, is the gas constant, is the absolute temperature in kelvins,
and Mis the molar mass. In general, the more rigid (or less compressible) the medium, the faster the speed of
sound. This observation is analogous to the fact that the frequency of simple harmonic motion is directly
proportional to the stiffness of the oscillating object as measured by k , the spring constant. The greater the density
of a medium, the slower the speed of sound. This observation is analogous to the fact that the frequency of a simple
harmonic motion is inversely proportional to m, the mass of the oscillating object. The speed of sound in air is low,
because air is easily compressible. Because liquids and solids are relatively rigid and very difficult to compress, the
speed of sound in such media is generally greater than in gases.
Medium v (m/s)
Gases at
Air 331
Carbon dioxide 259
Oxygen 316
Helium 965
Hydrogen 1290
Liquids at
Ethanol 1160
Mercury 1450
Water, fresh 1480
Sea Water 1540
Human tissue 1540
Solids (longitudinal or bulk)
Vulcanized rubber 54
Polyethylene 920
Marble 3810
Glass, Pyrex 5640
TABLE 17.1 Speed of Sound in
Various Media
Access for free at openstax.org
17.2 • Speed of Sound 811
Medium v (m/s)
Lead 1960
Aluminum 5120
Steel 5960
TABLE 17.1 Speed of Sound in
Various Media
Because the speed of sound depends on the density of the material, and the density depends on the temperature,
there is a relationship between the temperature in a given medium and the speed of sound in the medium. For air at
sea level, the speed of sound is given by
17.7
where the temperature in the first equation (denoted as ) is in degrees Celsius and the temperature in the second
equation (denoted as ) is in kelvins. The speed of sound in gases is related to the average speed of particles in
the gas, where is the Boltzmann constant and m is the mass of each
(identical) particle in the gas. Note that v refers to the speed of the coherent propagation of a disturbance (the
wave), whereas describes the speeds of particles in random directions. Thus, it is reasonable that the speed of
sound in air and other gases should depend on the square root of temperature. While not negligible, this is not a
strong dependence. At , the speed of sound is 331 m/s, whereas at , it is 343 m/s, less than a
increase. Figure 17.6 shows how a bat uses the speed of sound to sense distances.
FIGURE 17.6 A bat uses sound echoes to find its way about and to catch prey. The time for the echo to return is directly proportional to the
distance.
Derivation of the Speed of Sound in Air
As stated earlier, the speed of sound in a medium depends on the medium and the state of the medium. The
derivation of the equation for the speed of sound in air starts with the mass flow rate and continuity equation
discussed in Fluid Mechanics.
812 17 • Sound
Consider fluid flow through a pipe with cross-sectional area A(Figure 17.7). The mass in a small volume of length x
of the pipe is equal to the density times the volume, or The mass flow rate is
The continuity equation from Fluid Mechanics states that the mass flow rate into a volume has to equal the mass
flow rate out of the volume,
FIGURE 17.7 The mass of a fluid in a volume is equal to the density times the volume, derivative of the mass.
The mass flow rate is the time
Now consider a sound wave moving through a parcel of air. A parcel of air is a small volume of air with imaginary
boundaries (Figure 17.8). The density, temperature, and velocity on one side of the volume of the fluid are given as
and on the other side are
FIGURE 17.8 A sound wave moves through a volume of fluid. The density, temperature, and velocity of the fluid change from one side to the
other.
volume, so
The continuity equation states that the mass flow rate entering the volume is equal to the mass flow rate leaving the
This equation can be simplified, noting that the area cancels and considering that the multiplication of two
infinitesimals is approximately equal to zero:
The net force on the volume of fluid (Figure 17.9) equals the sum of the forces on the left face and the right face:
Access for free at openstax.org
17.2 • Speed of Sound 813
FIGURE 17.9 A sound wave moves through a volume of fluid. The force on each face can be found by the pressure times the area.
The acceleration is the force divided by the mass and the mass is equal to the density times the volume,
We have
From the continuity equation , we obtain
Consider a sound wave moving through air. During the process of compression and expansion of the gas, no heat is
added or removed from the system. A process where heat is not added or removed from the system is known as an
adiabatic system. Adiabatic processes are covered in detail in The First Law of Thermodynamics
(http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-2/pages/3-introduction), but for now it is sufficient to say
that for an adiabatic process, where p is the pressure, Vis the volume, and gamma is a constant
that depends on the gas. For air, . The density equals the number of moles times the molar mass divided by
the volume, so the volume is equal to The number of moles and the molar mass are constant and can be
absorbed into the constant Taking the natural logarithm of both sides yields
Differentiating with respect to the density, the equation becomes
If the air can be considered an ideal gas, we can use the ideal gas law:
Here Mis the molar mass of air:
Since the speed of sound is equal to , the speed is equal to
814 17 • Sound
Note that the velocity is faster at higher temperatures and slower for heavier gases. For air,
If the temperature is and the speed of sound is
The equation for the speed of sound in air in air as a function of absolute temperature:
can be simplified to give the equation for the speed of sound
One of the more important properties of sound is that its speed is nearly independent of the frequency. This
independence is certainly true in open air for sounds in the audible range. If this independence were not true, you
would certainly notice it for music played by a marching band in a football stadium, for example. Suppose that high-
frequency sounds traveled faster—then the farther you were from the band, the more the sound from the low-pitch
instruments would lag that from the high-pitch ones. But the music from all instruments arrives in cadence
independent of distance, so all frequencies must travel at nearly the same speed. Recall that
In a given medium under fixed conditions, v is constant, so there is a relationship between fand frequency, the smaller the wavelength (Figure 17.10).
the higher the
FIGURE 17.10 Because they travel at the same speed in a given medium, low-frequency sounds must have a greater wavelength than high-
frequency sounds. Here, the lower-frequency sounds are emitted by the large speaker, called a woofer, whereas the higher-frequency
sounds are emitted by the small speaker, called a tweeter. (credit: modification of work by Jane Whitney)
Access for free at openstax.org
17.2 • Speed of Sound 815
EXAMPLE 17.1
Calculating Wavelengths
Calculate the wavelengths of sounds at the extremes of the audible range, 20 and 20,000 Hz, in that the frequency values are accurate to two significant figures.)
air. (Assume
Strategy
To find wavelength from frequency, we can use
Solution
1. Identify knowns. The value for v is given by
2. Convert the temperature into kelvins and then enter the temperature into the equation
3. Solve the relationship between speed and wavelength for λ :
4. Enter the speed and the minimum frequency to give the maximum wavelength:
5. Enter the speed and the maximum frequency to give the minimum wavelength:
Significance
Because the product of fmultiplied by equals a constant, the smaller fis, the larger must be, and vice versa.
The speed of sound can change when sound travels from one medium to another, but the frequency usually remains
the same. This is similar to the frequency of a wave on a string being equal to the frequency of the force oscillating
the string. If v changes and fremains the same, then the wavelength must change. That is, because , the
higher the speed of a sound, the greater its wavelength for a given frequency.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.1
Imagine you observe two firework shells explode. You hear the explosion of one as soon as you see it. However, you
see the other shell for several milliseconds before you hear the explosion. Explain why this is so.
Although sound waves in a fluid are longitudinal, sound waves in a solid travel both as longitudinal waves and
transverse waves. Seismic waves, which are essentially sound waves in Earth’s crust produced by earthquakes, are
an interesting example of how the speed of sound depends on the rigidity of the medium. Earthquakes produce both
longitudinal and transverse waves, and these travel at different speeds. The bulk modulus of granite is greater than
its shear modulus. For that reason, the speed of longitudinal or pressure waves (P-waves) in earthquakes in granite
is significantly higher than the speed of transverse or shear waves (S-waves). Both types of earthquake waves travel
slower in less rigid material, such as sediments. P-waves have speeds of 4 to 7 km/s, and S-waves range in speed
from 2 to 5 km/s, both being faster in more rigid material. The P-wave gets progressively farther ahead of the S-
wave as they travel through Earth’s crust. The time between the P- and S-waves is routinely used to determine the
distance to their source, the epicenter of the earthquake. Because S-waves do not pass through the liquid core, two
shadow regions are produced (Figure 17.11).
816 17 • Sound
FIGURE 17.11 Earthquakes produce both longitudinal waves (P-waves) and transverse waves (S-waves), and these travel at different
speeds. Both waves travel at different speeds in the different regions of Earth, but in general, P-waves travel faster than S-waves. S-waves
cannot be supported by the liquid core, producing shadow regions.
Seismologists and geophysicists use properties and velocities of earthquake waves to study the Earth's interior,
which due to it's depth and pressure is not observable through many other means. In fact, the discoveries of the
structure of the Earth, illustrated in the figure above, resulted from earthquake observations. In 1914, Beno
Gutenberg used differences in wave speeds to determine that there must be a liquid core within the mantle. In
1936, Inge Lehmann began investigating P-waves from a New Zealand earthquake that had unexpectedly reached
Europe, which should have been in the shadow region. Up until that point, seismologists had explained such shadow
waves as being caused by some type of diffraction (as Gutenberg himself assumed) or a result of faulty
seismometers. However, Lehmann had installed the European instruments herself, and so trusted their accuracy.
She calculated that the amplitude of the waves must be caused by the existence of a solid inner core within the
liquid core. This model has been accepted and reinforced by decades of subsequent calculations, including those
from nuclear test explosions, which can be measured very precisely.
As sound waves move away from a speaker, or away from the epicenter of an earthquake, their power per unit area
decreases. This is why the sound is very loud near a speaker and becomes less loud as you move away from the
speaker. This also explains why there can be an extreme amount of damage at the epicenter of an earthquake but
only tremors are felt in areas far from the epicenter. The power per unit area is known as the intensity, and in the
next section, we will discuss how the intensity depends on the distance from the source.
17.3 Sound Intensity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the term intensity
• Explain the concept of sound intensity level
• Describe how the human ear translates sound
In a quiet forest, you can sometimes hear a single leaf fall to the ground. But when a passing motorist has their
stereo turned up, you cannot even hear what the person next to you in your car is saying (Figure 17.12). We are all
very familiar with the loudness of sounds and are aware that loudness is related to how energetically the source is
vibrating. High noise exposure is hazardous to hearing, which is why it is important for people working in industrial
settings to wear ear protection. The relevant physical quantity is sound intensity, a concept that is valid for all
sounds whether or not they are in the audible range.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.3 • Sound Intensity 817
FIGURE 17.12 Noise on crowded roadways, like this one in Delhi, makes it hard to hear others unless they shout. (credit: “Lingaraj G
J”/Flickr)
In Waves, we defined intensity as the power per unit area carried by a wave. Power is the rate at which energy is
transferred by the wave. In equation form, intensity Iis
17.8
where Pis the power through an area A . The SI unit for Iis If we assume that the sound wave is spherical,
and that no energy is lost to thermal processes, the energy of the sound wave is spread over a larger area as
distance increases, so the intensity decreases. The area of a sphere is As the wave spreads out from
to the energy also spreads out over a larger area:
17.9
The intensity decreases as the wave moves out from the source. In an inverse square relationship, such as the
intensity, when you double the distance, the intensity decreases to one quarter,
Generally, when considering the intensity of a sound wave, we take the intensity to be the time-averaged value of
the power, denoted by divided by the area,
17.10
The intensity of a sound wave is proportional to the change in the pressure squared and inversely proportional to the
density and the speed. Consider a parcel of a medium initially undisturbed and then influenced by a sound wave at
time t , as shown in Figure 17.13.
818 17 • Sound
FIGURE 17.13 An undisturbed parcel of a medium with a volume shown in blue. A sound wave moves through the medium at
time t , and the parcel is displaced and expands, as shown by dotted lines. The change in volume is , where the displacement of the leading edge of the parcel and is the displacement of the trailing edge of the parcel. In the figure, and
the parcel expands, but the parcel can either expand or compress , depending on which part of the sound wave (compression or
rarefaction) is moving through the parcel.
As the sound wave moves through the parcel, the parcel is displaced and may expand or contract. If volume has increased and the pressure decreases. If the volume has decreased and the pressure
increases. The change in the volume is
, the
is
The fractional change in the volume is the change in volume divided by the original volume:
Recall that
If
The fractional change in volume is related to the pressure fluctuation by the bulk modulus the minus sign is required because the volume is inversel y related to the pressure. (We use lowercase p for pressure
to distinguish it from power, denoted by P .) The change in pressure is therefore the sound wave is sinusoidal, then the displacement as shown in Equation 17.2 is
and the pressure is found to be
The intensity of the sound wave is the power per unit area, and the power is the force times the velocity,
Here, the velocity is the velocity of the oscillations of the medium, and not the velocity of the
sound wave. The velocity of the medium is the time rate of change in the displacement:
Thus, the intensity becomes
To find the time-averaged intensity over one period for a position x, we integrate over the period,
Using and we obtain
That is, the intensity of a sound wave is related to its amplitude squared by
17.11
Access for free at openstax.org
17.3 • Sound Intensity 819
Here, is the pressure variation or pressure amplitude in units of pascals (Pa) or . The energy (as kinetic
energy ) of an oscillating element of air due to a traveling sound wave is proportional to its amplitude squared.
In this equation, is the density of the material in which the sound wave travels, in units of and v is the
speed of sound in the medium, in units of m/s. The pressure variation is proportional to the amplitude of the
oscillation, so Ivaries as This relationship is consistent with the fact that the sound wave is produced by
some vibration; the greater its pressure amplitude, the more the air is compressed in the sound it creates.
Human Hearing and Sound Intensity Levels
As stated earlier in this chapter, hearing is the perception of sound. The hearing mechanism involves some
interesting physics. The sound wave that impinges upon our ear is a pressure wave. The ear is a transducer that
converts sound waves into electrical nerve impulses in a manner much more sophisticated than, but analogous to, a
microphone. Figure 17.14 shows the anatomy of the ear.
FIGURE 17.14 The anatomy of the human ear.
The outer ear, or ear canal, carries sound to the recessed, protected eardrum. The air column in the ear canal
resonates and is partially responsible for the sensitivity of the ear to sounds in the 2000–5000-Hz range. The
middle ear converts sound into mechanical vibrations and applies these vibrations to the cochlea.
INTERACTIVE
Watch this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21humanear) for a more detailed discussion of the workings of the human
ear.
The range of intensities that the human ear can hear depends on the frequency of the sound, but, in general, the
range is quite large. The minimum threshold intensity that can be heard is Pain is experienced at
intensities of Measurements of sound intensity (in units of ) are very cumbersome due to
this large range in values. For this reason, as well as for other reasons, the concept of sound intensity level was
proposed.
The sound intensity level defined as
of a sound, measured in decibels, having an intensity Iin watts per meter squared, is
820 17 • Sound
17.12
where is a reference intensity, corresponding to the threshold intensity of sound that a person
with normal hearing can perceive at a frequency of 1.00 kHz. It is more common to consider sound intensity levels
in dB than in How human ears perceive sound can be more accurately described by the logarithm of the
intensity rather than directly by the intensity. Because is defined in terms of a ratio, it is a unitless quantity, telling
you the levelof the sound relative to a fixed standard ( ). The units of decibels (dB) are used to indicate
this ratio is multiplied by 10 in its definition. The bel, upon which the decibel is based, is named for Alexander
Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone.
The decibel level of a sound having the threshold intensity of is because Table
17.2 gives levels in decibels and intensities in watts per meter squared for some familiar sounds. The ear is
sensitive to as little as a trillionth of a watt per meter squared—even more impressive when you realize that the area
of the eardrum is only about so that only falls on it at the threshold of hearing. Air molecules in a
sound wave of this intensity vibrate over a distance of less than one molecular diameter, and the gauge pressures
involved are less than
Sound intensity level
(dB)
Intensity I Example/effect
0 Threshold of hearing at 1000 Hz
10 Rustle of leaves
20 Whisper at 1-m distance
30 Quiet home
40 Average home
50 Average office, soft music
60 Normal conversation
70 Noisy office, busy traffic
80 Loud radio, classroom lecture
1
90 Inside a heavy truck; damage from prolonged exposure
100 Noisy factory, siren at 30 m; damage from 8 h per day
exposure
110 Damage from 30 min per day exposure
120 1 Loud rock concert; pneumatic chipper at 2 m; threshold of
pain
TABLE 17.2 Sound Intensity Levels and Intensities [1] Several government agencies and health-related professional associations
recommend that 85 dB not be exceeded for 8-hour daily exposures in the absence of hearing protection.
1 Several government agencies and health-related professional associations recommend that 85 dB not be exceeded for 8-hour daily
exposures in the absence of hearing protection.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.3 • Sound Intensity 821
Sound intensity level
(dB)
Intensity I Example/effect
140 Jet airplane at 30 m; severe pain, damage in seconds
160 Bursting of eardrums
TABLE 17.2 Sound Intensity Levels and Intensities [1] Several government agencies and health-related professional associations
recommend that 85 dB not be exceeded for 8-hour daily exposures in the absence of hearing protection.
An observation readily verified by examining Table 17.2 or by using Equation 17.12 is that each factor of 10 in
intensity corresponds to 10 dB. For example, a 90-dB sound compared with a 60-dB sound is 30 dB greater, or
three factors of 10 (that is, times) as intense. Another example is that if one sound is as intense as another,
it is 70 dB higher (Table 17.3).
2.0 3.0 dB
5.0 7.0 dB
10.0 10.0 dB
100.0 20.0 dB
1000.0 30.0 dB
TABLE 17.3 Ratios of
Intensities and
Corresponding
Differences in Sound
Intensity Levels
EXAMPLE 17.2
, so we can calculate Iusing the equation Calculating Sound Intensity Levels
Calculate the sound intensity level in decibels for a sound wave traveling in air at amplitude of 0.656 Pa.
Strategy
We are given definition in
Solution
1. Identify knowns:
Sound travels at 331 m/s in air at
Air has a density of 2. Enter these values and the pressure amplitude into
and having a pressure
Using I , we can calculate straight from its
at atmospheric pressure and
3. Enter the value for Iand the known value for intensity level in decibels:
into Calculate to find the sound
822 17 • Sound
Significance
This 87-dB sound has an intensity five times as great as an 80-dB sound. So a factor of five in intensity corresponds
to a difference of 7 dB in sound intensity level. This value is true for any intensities differing by a factor of five.
EXAMPLE 17.3
Changing Intensity Levels of a Sound
Show that if one sound is twice as intense as another, it has a sound level about 3 dB higher.
Strategy
We are given that the ratio of two intensities is 2 to 1, and are then asked to find the difference in their sound levels
in decibels. We can solve this problem by using of the properties of logarithms.
Solution
1. Identify knowns:
The ratio of the two intensities is 2 to 1, or
We wish to show that the difference in sound levels is about 3 dB. That is, we want to show:
Note that
2. Use the definition of to obtain
Thus,
Significance
This means that the two sound intensity levels differ by 3.01 dB, or about 3 dB, as advertised. Note that because
only the ratio is given (and not the actual intensities), this result is true for any intensities that differ by a
factor of two. For example, a 56.0-dB sound is twice as intense as a 53.0-dB sound, a 97.0-dB sound is half as
intense as a 100-dB sound, and so on.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.2
Identify common sounds at the levels of 10 dB, 50 dB, and 100 dB.
Another decibel scale is also in use, called the sound pressure level, based on the ratio of the pressure amplitude
to a reference pressure. This scale is used particularly in applications where sound travels in water. It is beyond the
scope of this text to treat this scale because it is not commonly used for sounds in air, but it is important to note that
very different decibel levels may be encountered when sound pressure levels are quoted.
Hearing and Pitch
The human ear has a tremendous range and sensitivity. It can give us a wealth of simple information—such as pitch,
loudness, and direction.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.3 • Sound Intensity 823
The perception of frequency is called pitch. Typically, humans have excellent relative pitch and can discriminate
between two sounds if their frequencies differ by 0.3% or more. For example, 500.0 and 501.5 Hz are noticeably
different. Musical notes are sounds of a particular frequency that can be produced by most instruments and in
Western music have particular names, such as A-sharp, C, or E-flat.
The perception of intensity is called loudness. At a given frequency, it is possible to discern differences of about 1
dB, and a change of 3 dB is easily noticed. But loudness is not related to intensity alone. Frequency has a major
effect on how loud a sound seems. Sounds near the high- and low-frequency extremes of the hearing range seem
even less loud, because the ear is less sensitive at those frequencies. When a violin plays middle C, there is no
mistaking it for a piano playing the same note. The reason is that each instrument produces a distinctive set of
frequencies and intensities. We call our perception of these combinations of frequencies and intensities tone quality
or, more commonly, the timbre of the sound. Timbre is the shape of the wave that arises from the many reflections,
resonances, and superposition in an instrument.
A unit called a phon is used to express loudness numerically. Phons differ from decibels because the phon is a unit
of loudness perception, whereas the decibel is a unit of physical intensity. Figure 17.15 shows the relationship of
loudness to intensity (or intensity level) and frequency for persons with normal hearing. The curved lines are equal-
loudness curves. Each curve is labeled with its loudness in phons. Any sound along a given curve is perceived as
equally loud by the average person. The curves were determined by having large numbers of people compare the
loudness of sounds at different frequencies and sound intensity levels. At a frequency of 1000 Hz, phons are taken
to be numerically equal to decibels.
FIGURE 17.15 The relationship of loudness in phons to intensity level (in decibels) and intensity (in watts per meter squared) for persons
with normal hearing. The curved lines are equal-loudness curves—all sounds on a given curve are perceived as equally loud. Phons and
decibels are defined to be the same at 1000 Hz.
EXAMPLE 17.4
Measuring Loudness
(a) What is the loudness in phons of a 100-Hz sound that has an intensity level of 80 dB? (b) What is the intensity
level in decibels of a 4000-Hz sound having a loudness of 70 phons? (c) At what intensity level will an 8000-Hz
sound have the same loudness as a 200-Hz sound at 60 dB?
Strategy
The graph in Figure 17.15 should be referenced to solve this example. To find the loudness of a given sound, you
824 17 • Sound
must know its frequency and intensity level, locate that point on the square grid, and then interpolate between
loudness curves to get the loudness in phons. Once that point is located, the intensity level can be determined from
the vertical axis.
Solution
1. 2. 3. Identify knowns: The square grid of the graph relating phons and decibels is a plot of intensity level versus
frequency—both physical quantities: 100 Hz at 80 dB lies halfway between the curves marked 70 and 80
phons.
Find the loudness: 75 phons.
Identify knowns: Values are given to be 4000 Hz at 70 phons.
Follow the 70-phon curve until it reaches 4000 Hz. At that point, it is below the 70 dB line at about 67 dB.
Find the intensity level: 67 dB.
Locate the point for a 200 Hz and 60 dB sound.
Find the loudness: This point lies just slightly above the 50-phon curve, and so its loudness is 51 phons.
Look for the 51-phon level is at 8000 Hz: 63 dB.
Significance
These answers, like all information extracted from Figure 17.15, have uncertainties of several phons or several
decibels, partly due to difficulties in interpolation, but mostly related to uncertainties in the equal-loudness curves.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.3
Describe how amplitude is related to the loudness of a sound.
In this section, we discussed the characteristics of sound and how we hear, but how are the sounds we hear
produced? Interesting sources of sound are musical instruments and the human voice, and we will discuss these
sources. But before we can understand how musical instruments produce sound, we need to look at the basic
mechanisms behind these instruments. The theories behind the mechanisms used by musical instruments involve
interference, superposition, and standing waves, which we discuss in the next section.
17.4 Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the mechanism behind sound-reducing headphones
• Describe resonance in a tube closed at one end and open at the other end
• Describe resonance in a tube open at both ends
Interference is the hallmark of waves, all of which exhibit constructive and destructive interference exactly
analogous to that seen for water waves. In fact, one way to prove something “is a wave” is to observe interference
effects. Since sound is a wave, we expect it to exhibit interference.
Interference of Sound Waves
In Waves, we discussed the interference of wave functions that differ only in a phase shift. We found that the wave
function resulting from the superposition of and is
One way for two identical waves that are initially in phase to become out of phase with one another is to have the
waves travel different distances; that is, they have different path lengths. Sound waves provide an excellent
example of a phase shift due to a path difference. As we have discussed, sound waves can basically be modeled as
longitudinal waves, where the molecules of the medium oscillate around an equilibrium position, or as pressure
waves.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.4 • Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave When the waves leave the speakers, they move out as spherical waves (Figure 17.16). The waves interfere;
constructive inference is produced by the combination of two crests or two troughs, as shown. Destructive
interference is produced by the combination of a trough and a crest.
FIGURE 17.16 When sound waves are produced by a speaker, they travel at the speed of sound and move out as spherical waves. Here, two
speakers produce the same steady tone (frequency). The result is points of high-intensity sound (highlighted), which result from two crests
(compression) or two troughs (rarefaction) overlapping. Destructive interference results from a crest and trough overlapping. The points
where there is constructive interference in the figure occur because the two waves are in phase at those points. Points of destructive
interference (Figure 17.17) are the result of the two waves being out of phase.
825
826 17 • Sound
FIGURE 17.17 Two speakers being driven by a single signal generator. The sound waves produced by the speakers are in phase and are of a
single frequency. The sound waves interfere with each other. When two crests or two troughs coincide, there is constructive interference,
marked by the red and blue dots. When a trough and a crest coincide, destructive interference occurs, marked by black dots. The phase
difference is due to the path lengths traveled by the individual waves. Two identical waves travel two different path lengths to a point P . (a)
The difference in the path lengths is one wavelength, resulting in total constructive interference and a resulting amplitude equal to twice
the original amplitude. (b) The difference in the path lengths is less than one wavelength but greater than one half a wavelength, resulting in
an amplitude greater than zero and less than twice the original amplitude. (c) The difference in the path lengths is one half of a wavelength,
resulting in total destructive interference and a resulting amplitude of zero.
The phase difference at each point is due to the different path lengths traveled by each wave. When the difference in
the path lengths is an integer multiple of a wavelength,
the waves are in phase and there is constructive interference. When the difference in path lengths is an odd multiple
of a half wavelength,
Access for free at openstax.org
17.4 • Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave 827
the waves are sound-level intensity meter.
out of phase and the result is destructive interference. These points can be located with a
EXAMPLE 17.5
Interference of Sound Waves
Two speakers are separated by 5.00 m and are being driven by a signal generator at an unknown frequency. A
student with a sound-level meter walks out 6.00 m and down 2.00 m, and finds the first minimum intensity, as
shown below. What is the frequency supplied by the signal generator? Assume the wave speed of sound is
Strategy
The wave velocity is equal to The frequency is then interference and the first such point occurs where there is path difference of geometry.
Solution
1. Find the path length to the minimum point from each speaker.
A minimum intensity indicates destructive
which can be found from the
2. Use the difference in the path length to find the wavelength.
3. Find the frequency.
Significance
If point Pwere a point of maximum intensity, then the path length would be an integer multiple of the wavelength.
828 17 • Sound
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.4
If you walk around two speakers playing music, how come you do not notice places where the music is very loud or
very soft, that is, where there is constructive and destructive interference?
The concept of a phase shift due to a difference in path length is very important. You will use this concept again in
Interference (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/3-introduction) and Photons and
Matter Waves (http:/ /openstax.org/books/university-physics-volume-3/pages/6-introduction), where we discuss
how Thomas Young used this method in his famous double-slit experiment to provide evidence that light has
wavelike properties.
Noise Reduction through Destructive Interference
Figure 17.18 shows a clever use of sound interference to cancel noise. Larger-scale applications of active noise
reduction by destructive interference have been proposed for entire passenger compartments in commercial
aircraft. To obtain destructive interference, a fast electronic analysis is performed, and a second sound is introduced
out of phase with the original sound, with its maxima and minima exactly reversed from the incoming noise.
Sound waves in fluids are pressure waves and are consistent with Pascal’s principle; that is, pressures from two
different sources add and subtract like simple numbers. Therefore, positive and negative gauge pressures add to a
much smaller pressure, producing a lower-intensity sound. Although completely destructive interference is possible
only under the simplest conditions, it is possible to reduce noise levels by 30 dB or more using this technique.
FIGURE 17.18 Headphones designed to cancel noise with destructive interference create a sound wave exactly opposite to the incoming
sound. These headphones can be more effective than the simple passive attenuation used in most ear protection. Such headphones were
used on the record-setting, around-the-world nonstop flight of the V o y ag er aircraft in 1986 to protect the pilots’ hearing from engine noise.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.5
Describe how noise-canceling headphones differ from standard headphones used to block outside sounds.
Where else can we observe sound interference? All sound resonances, such as in musical instruments, are due to
constructive and destructive interference. Only the resonant frequencies interfere constructively to form standing
waves, whereas others interfere destructively and are absent.
Resonance in a Tube Closed at one End
As we discussed in Waves, standing waves are formed by two waves moving in opposite directions. When two
identical sinusoidal waves move in opposite directions, the waves may be modeled as
Access for free at openstax.org
17.4 • Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave 829
When these two waves interfere, the resultant wave is a standing wave:
Resonance can be produced due to the boundary conditions imposed on a wave. In Waves, we showed that
resonance could be produced in a string under tension that had symmetrical boundary conditions, specifically, a
node at each end. We defined a node as a fixed point where the string did not move. We found that the symmetrical
boundary conditions resulted in some frequencies resonating and producing standing waves, also called normal
modes, while other frequencies interfere destructively. Sound waves can resonate in a hollow tube, and the
frequencies of the sound waves that resonate depend on the boundary conditions.
Suppose we have a tube that is closed at one end and open at the other. If we hold a vibrating tuning fork near the
open end of the tube, an incident sound wave travels through the tube and reflects off the closed end. The reflected
sound has the same frequency and wavelength as the incident sound wave, but is traveling in the opposite direction.
At the closed end of the tube, the molecules of air have very little freedom to oscillate, and a node arises. At the
open end, the molecules are free to move, and at the right frequency, an antinode occurs. Unlike the symmetrical
boundary conditions for the standing waves on the string, the boundary conditions for a tube open at one end and
closed at the other end are anti-symmetrical: a node at the closed end and an antinode at the open end.
If the tuning fork has just the right frequency, the air column in the tube resonates loudly, but at most frequencies it
vibrates very little. This observation just means that the air column has only certain natural frequencies. Consider
the lowest frequency that will cause the tube to resonate, producing a loud sound. There will be a node at the closed
end and an antinode at the open end, as shown in Figure 17.19.
FIGURE 17.19 Resonance of air in a tube closed at one end, caused by a tuning fork that vibrates at the lowest frequency that can produce
resonance (the fundamental frequency). A node exists at the closed end and an antinode at the open end.
The standing wave formed in the tube has an antinode at the open end and a node at the closed end. The distance
from a node to an antinode is one-fourth of a wavelength, and this equals the length of the tube; thus,
This same resonance can be produced by a vibration introduced at or near the closed end of the tube (Figure 17.20).
It is best to consider this a natural vibration of the air column, independently of how it is induced.
FIGURE 17.20 The same standing wave is created in the tube by a vibration introduced near its closed end.
Given that maximum air displacements are possible at the open end and none at the closed end, other shorter
830 17 • Sound
wavelengths can resonate in the tube, such as the one shown in Figure 17.21. Here the standing wave has three-
fourths of its wavelength in the tube, or so that Continuing this process reveals a whole series
of shorter-wavelength and higher-frequency sounds that resonate in the tube. We use specific terms for the
resonances in any system. The lowest resonant frequency is called the fundamental, while all higher resonant
frequencies are called overtones. The resonant frequencies that are integral multiples of the fundamental are
collectively called harmonics. The fundamental is the first harmonic, the second harmonic is twice the frequency of
the first harmonic, and so on. Some of these harmonics may not exist for a given scenario. Figure 17.22 shows the
fundamental and the first three overtones (or the first, third, fifth, and seventh harmonics) in a tube closed at one
end.
FIGURE 17.21 Another resonance for a tube closed at one end. This standing wave has maximum air displacement at the open end and
none at the closed end. The wavelength is shorter, with three-fourths equaling the length of the tube, so that . This higher-
frequency vibration is the first overtone.
FIGURE 17.22 The fundamental and three lowest overtones for a tube closed at one end. All have maximum air displacements at the open
end and none at the closed end.
The relationship for the resonant wavelengths of a tube closed at one end is
17.13
Now let us look for a pattern in the resonant frequencies for a simple tube that is closed at one end. The
fundamental has and frequency is related to wavelength and the speed of sound as given by
Solving for fin this equation gives
where v is the speed of sound in air. Similarly, the first overtone has (see Figure 17.22), so that
Because we call the first overtone the third harmonic. Continuing this process, we see a pattern that can
be generalized in a single expression. The resonant frequencies of a tube closed at one end are
17.14
where is the fundamental, is the first overtone, and so on. It is interesting that the resonant frequencies
depend on the speed of sound and, hence, on temperature. This dependence poses a noticeable problem for organs
Access for free at openstax.org
17.4 • Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave 831
in old unheated cathedrals, and it is also the reason why musicians commonly bring their wind instruments to room
temperature before playing them.
Resonance in a Tube Open at Both Ends
Another source of standing waves is a tube that is open at both ends. In this case, the boundary conditions are
symmetrical: an antinode at each end. The resonances of tubes open at both ends can be analyzed in a very similar
fashion to those for tubes closed at one end. The air columns in tubes open at both ends have maximum air
displacements at both ends (Figure 17.23). Standing waves form as shown.
FIGURE 17.23 The resonant frequencies of a tube open at both ends, including the fundamental and the first three overtones. In all cases,
the maximum air displacements occur at both ends of the tube, giving it different natural frequencies than a tube closed at one end.
The relationship for the resonant wavelengths of a tube open at both ends is
17.15
Based on the fact that a tube open at both ends has maximum air displacements at both ends, and using Figure
17.23 as a guide, we can see that the resonant frequencies of a tube open at both ends are
17.16
where is the fundamental, is the first overtone, is the second overtone, and so on. Note that a tube open at
both ends has a fundamental frequency twice what it would have if closed at one end. It also has a different
spectrum of overtones than a tube closed at one end.
Note that a tube open at both ends has symmetrical boundary conditions, similar to the string fixed at both ends
discussed in Waves. The relationships for the wavelengths and frequencies of a stringed instrument are the same as
given in Equation 17.15 and Equation 17.16. The speed of the wave on the string (from Waves) is around the string vibrates at the same frequency as the string, producing sound of the same frequency. The sound
wave moves at the speed of sound and the wavelength can be found using
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.6
How is it possible to use a standing wave’s node and antinode to determine the length of a closed-end tube?
The air
INTERACTIVE
This video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21soundwaves) lets you visualize sound waves.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.7
You observe two musical instruments that you cannot identify. One plays high-pitched sounds and the other plays
832 17 • Sound
low-pitched sounds. How could you determine which is which without hearing either of them play?
17.5 Sources of Musical Sound
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the resonant frequencies in instruments that can be modeled as a tube with symmetrical
boundary conditions
• Describe the resonant frequencies in instruments that can be modeled as a tube with anti-symmetrical
boundary conditions
Some musical instruments, such as woodwinds, brass, and pipe organs, can be modeled as tubes with symmetrical
boundary conditions, that is, either open at both ends or closed at both ends (Figure 17.24). Other instruments can
be modeled as tubes with anti-symmetrical boundary conditions, such as a tube with one end open and the other
end closed (Figure 17.25).
FIGURE 17.24 Some musical instruments can be modeled as a pipe open at both ends.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.5 • Sources of Musical Sound 833
FIGURE 17.25 Some musical instruments can be modeled as a pipe closed at one end.
Resonant frequencies are produced by longitudinal waves that travel down the tubes and interfere with the
reflected waves traveling in the opposite direction. A pipe organ is manufactured with various tubes of fixed lengths
to produce different frequencies. The waves are the result of compressed air allowed to expand in the tubes. Even in
open tubes, some reflection occurs due to the constraints of the sides of the tubes and the atmospheric pressure
outside the open tube.
The antinodes do not occur at the opening of the tube, but rather depend on the radius of the tube. The waves do
not fully expand until they are outside the open end of a tube, and for a thin-walled tube, an end correction should
be added. This end correction is approximately 0.6 times the radius of the tube and should be added to the length of
the tube.
Players of instruments such as the flute or oboe vary the length of the tube by opening and closing finger holes. On a
trombone, you change the tube length by using a sliding tube. Bugles have a fixed length and can produce only a
limited range of frequencies.
The fundamental and overtones can be present simultaneously in a variety of combinations. For example, middle C
on a trumpet sounds distinctively different from middle C on a clarinet, although both instruments are modified
versions of a tube closed at one end. The fundamental frequency is the same (and usually the most intense), but the
overtones and their mix of intensities are different and subject to shading by the musician. This mix is what gives
various musical instruments (and human voices) their distinctive characteristics, whether they have air columns,
strings, sounding boxes, or drumheads. In fact, much of our speech is determined by shaping the cavity formed by
the throat and mouth, and positioning the tongue to adjust the fundamental and combination of overtones. For
example, simple resonant cavities can be made to resonate with the sound of the vowels (Figure 17.26). In boys at
puberty, the larynx grows and the shape of the resonant cavity changes, giving rise to the difference in predominant
frequencies in speech between men and women.
834 17 • Sound
FIGURE 17.26 The throat and mouth form an air column closed at one end that resonates in response to vibrations in the voice box. The
spectrum of overtones and their intensities vary with mouth shaping and tongue position to form different sounds. The voice box can be
replaced with a mechanical vibrator, and understandable speech is still possible. Variations in basic shapes make different voices
recognizable.
EXAMPLE 17.6
Finding the Length of a Tube with a 128-Hz Fundamental
(a) What length should a tube closed at one end have on a day when the air temperature is
if its fundamental frequency is to be 128 Hz (C below middle C)?
(b) What is the frequency of its fourth overtone?
Strategy
The length Lcan be found from the relationship Solution
a. , but we first need to find the speed of sound v.
Identify knowns: The fundamental frequency is 128 Hz, and the air temperature is .
Use to find the fundamental frequency ( ),
Solve this equation for length,
Find the speed of sound using ,
Access for free at openstax.org
17.5 • Sources of Musical Sound 835
Enter the values of the speed of sound and frequency into the expression for L .
b. Identify knowns: The first overtone has and the fourth overtone has .
Enter the value for the fourth overtone into
, the second overtone has , the third overtone has ,
Significance
Many wind instruments are modified tubes that have finger holes, valves, and other devices for changing the length
of the resonating air column and hence, the frequency of the note played. Horns producing very low frequencies
require tubes so long that they are coiled into loops. An example is the tuba. Whether an overtone occurs in a simple
tube or a musical instrument depends on how it is stimulated to vibrate and the details of its shape. The trombone,
for example, does not produce its fundamental frequency and only makes overtones.
If you have two tubes with the same fundamental frequency, but one is open at both ends and the other is closed at
one end, they would sound different when played because they have different overtones. Middle C, for example,
would sound richer played on an open tube, because it has even multiples of the fundamental as well as odd. A
closed tube has only odd multiples.
Resonance
Resonance occurs in many different systems, including strings, air columns, and atoms. As we discussed in earlier
chapters, resonance is the driven or forced oscillation of a system at its natural frequency. At resonance, energy is
transferred rapidly to the oscillating system, and the amplitude of its oscillations grows until the system can no
longer be described by Hooke’s law. An example of this is the distorted sound intentionally produced in certain types
of rock music.
Wind instruments use resonance in air columns to amplify tones made by lips or vibrating reeds. Other instruments
also use air resonance in clever ways to amplify sound. Figure 17.27 shows a violin and a guitar, both of which have
sounding boxes but with different shapes, resulting in different overtone structures. The vibrating string creates a
sound that resonates in the sounding box, greatly amplifying the sound and creating overtones that give the
instrument its characteristic timbre. The more complex the shape of the sounding box, the greater its ability to
resonate over a wide range of frequencies. The marimba, like the one shown in Figure 17.28, uses pots or gourds
below the wooden slats to amplify their tones. The resonance of the pot can be adjusted by adding water.
FIGURE 17.27 String instruments such as (a) violins and (b) guitars use resonance in their sounding boxes to amplify and enrich the sound
created by their vibrating strings. The bridge and supports couple the string vibrations to the sounding boxes and air within. (credit a:
modification of work by Feliciano Guimarães; credit b: modification of work by Steve Snodgrass)
836 17 • Sound
FIGURE 17.28 This marimba uses gourds as resonance chambers to amplify its sound. (credit: “APC Events”/Flickr)
We have emphasized sound applications in our discussions of resonance and standing waves, but these ideas apply
to any system that has wave characteristics. Vibrating strings, for example, are actually resonating and have
fundamentals and overtones similar to those for air columns. More subtle are the resonances in atoms due to the
wave character of their electrons. Their orbitals can be viewed as standing waves, which have a fundamental
(ground state) and overtones (excited states). It is fascinating that wave characteristics apply to such a wide range
of physical systems.
17.6 Beats
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the beat frequency produced by two sound waves that differ in frequency
• Describe how beats are produced by musical instruments
The study of music provides many examples of the superposition of waves and the constructive and destructive
interference that occurs. Very few examples of music being performed consist of a single source playing a single
frequency for an extended period of time. You will probably agree that a single frequency of sound for an extended
period might be boring to the point of irritation, similar to the unwanted drone of an aircraft engine or a loud fan.
Music is pleasant and interesting due to mixing the changing frequencies of various instruments and voices.
An interesting phenomenon that occurs due to the constructive and destructive interference of two or more
frequencies of sound is the phenomenon of beats. If two sounds differ in frequencies, the sound waves can be
modeled as
Using the trigonometric identity to Figure 17.29:
and considering the point in space as
we find the resulting sound at a point in space, from the superposition of the two sound waves, is equal
Access for free at openstax.org
17.6 • Beats 837
where the beat frequency is
17.17
FIGURE 17.29 Beats produced by the constructive and destructive interference of two sound waves that differ in frequency.
These beats can be used by piano tuners to tune a piano. A tuning fork is struck and a note is played on the piano. As
the piano tuner tunes the string, the beats have a lower frequency as the frequency of the note played approaches
the frequency of the tuning fork.
EXAMPLE 17.7
Find the Beat Frequency Between Two Tuning Forks
What is the beat frequency produced when a tuning fork of a frequency of 256 Hz and a tuning fork of a frequency of
512 Hz are struck simultaneously?
Strategy
The beat frequency is the difference of the two frequencies.
Solution
We use
Significance
The beat frequency is the absolute value of the difference between the two frequencies. A negative frequency would
not make sense.
838 17 • Sound
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.8
What would happen if more than two frequencies interacted? Consider three frequencies.
The study of the superposition of various waves has many interesting applications beyond the study of sound. In
later chapters, we will discuss the wave properties of particles. The particles can be modeled as a “wave packet”
that results from the superposition of various waves, where the particle moves at the “group velocity” of the wave
packet.
17.7 The Doppler Effect
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the change in observed frequency as a moving source of sound approaches or departs from a
stationary observer
• Explain the change in observed frequency as an observer moves toward or away from a stationary source
of sound
The characteristic sound of a motorcycle buzzing by is an example of the Doppler effect. Specifically, if you are
standing on a street corner and observe an ambulance with a siren sounding passing at a constant speed, you notice
two characteristic changes in the sound of the siren. First, the sound increases in loudness as the ambulance
approaches and decreases in loudness as it moves away, which is expected. But in addition, the high-pitched siren
shifts dramatically to a lower-pitched sound. As the ambulance passes, the frequency of the sound heard by a
stationary observer changes from a constant high frequency to a constant lower frequency, even though the siren is
producing a constant source frequency. The closer the ambulance brushes by, the more abrupt the shift. Also, the
faster the ambulance moves, the greater the shift. We also hear this characteristic shift in frequency for passing
cars, airplanes, and trains.
The Doppler effect is an alteration in the observed frequency of a sound due to motion of either the source or the
observer. Although less familiar, this effect is easily noticed for a stationary source and moving observer. For
example, if you ride a train past a stationary warning horn, you will hear the horn’s frequency shift from high to low
as you pass by. The actual change in frequency due to relative motion of source and observer is called a Doppler
shift. The Doppler effect and Doppler shift are named for the Austrian physicist and mathematician Christian Johann
Doppler (1803–1853), who did experiments with both moving sources and moving observers. Doppler, for example,
had musicians play on a moving open train car and also play standing next to the train tracks as a train passed by.
Their music was observed both on and off the train, and changes in frequency were measured.
What causes the Doppler shift? Figure 17.30 illustrates sound waves emitted by stationary and moving sources in a
stationary air mass. Each disturbance spreads out spherically from the point at which the sound is emitted. If the
source is stationary, then all of the spheres representing the air compressions in the sound wave are centered on the
same point, and the stationary observers on either side hear the same wavelength and frequency as emitted by the
source (case a). If the source is moving, the situation is different. Each compression of the air moves out in a sphere
from the point at which it was emitted, but the point of emission moves. This moving emission point causes the air
compressions to be closer together on one side and farther apart on the other. Thus, the wavelength is shorter in the
direction the source is moving (on the right in case b), and longer in the opposite direction (on the left in case b).
Finally, if the observers move, as in case (c), the frequency at which they receive the compressions changes. The
observer moving toward the source receives them at a higher frequency, and the person moving away from the
source receives them at a lower frequency.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.7 • The Doppler Effect 839
FIGURE 17.30 Sounds emitted by a source spread out in spherical waves. (a) When the source, observers, and air are stationary, the
wavelength and frequency are the same in all directions and to all observers. (b) Sounds emitted by a source moving to the right spread out
from the points at which they were emitted. The wavelength is reduced, and consequently, the frequency is increased in the direction of
motion, so that the observer on the right hears a higher-pitched sound. The opposite is true for the observer on the left, where the
wavelength is increased and the frequency is reduced. (c) The same effect is produced when the observers move relative to the source.
Motion toward the source increases frequency as the observer on the right passes through more wave crests than she would if stationary.
Motion away from the source decreases frequency as the observer on the left passes through fewer wave crests than he would if stationary.
We know that wavelength and frequency are related by where v is the fixed speed of sound. The sound
moves in a medium and has the same speed v in that medium whether the source is moving or not. Thus, f
multiplied by is a constant. Because the observer on the right in case (b) receives a shorter wavelength, the
frequency she receives must be higher. Similarly, the observer on the left receives a longer wavelength, and hence
he hears a lower frequency. The same thing happens in case (c). A higher frequency is received by the observer
moving toward the source, and a lower frequency is received by an observer moving away from the source. In
general, then, relative motion of source and observer toward one another increases the received frequency. Relative
motion apart decreases frequency. The greater the relative speed, the greater the effect.
The Doppler effect occurs not only for sound, but for any wave when there is relative motion between the observer
and the source. Doppler shifts occur in the frequency of sound, light, and water waves, for example. Doppler shifts
can be used to determine velocity, such as when ultrasound is reflected from blood in a medical diagnostic. The
relative velocities of stars and galaxies is determined by the shift in the frequencies of light received from them and
has implied much about the origins of the universe. Modern physics has been profoundly affected by observations of
Doppler shifts.
Derivation of the Observed Frequency due to the Doppler Shift
Consider two stationary observers Xand Yin Figure 17.31, located on either side of a stationary source. Each
observer hears the same frequency, and that frequency is the frequency produced by the stationary source.
FIGURE 17.31 A stationary source sends out sound waves at a constant frequency sound v. Two stationary observers Xand Y , on either side of the source, observe a frequency with a constant wavelength , with a wavelength
at the speed of
Now consider a stationary observer Xwith a source moving away from the observer with a constant speed
(Figure 17.32). At time , the source sends out a sound wave, indicated in black. This wave moves out at the
840 17 • Sound
speed of sound v. The position of the sound wave at each time interval of period is shown as dotted lines. After
one period, the source has moved and emits a second sound wave, which moves out at the speed of
sound. The source continues to move and produce sound waves, as indicated by the circles numbered 3 and 4.
Notice that as the waves move out, they remained centered at their respective point of origin.
FIGURE 17.32 A source moving at a constant speed away from an observer X . The moving source sends out sound waves at a constant
frequency with a constant wavelength , at the speed of sound v. Snapshots of the source at an interval of are shown as the source
moves away from the stationary observer X . The solid lines represent the position of the sound waves after four periods from the initial
time. The dotted lines are used to show the positions of the waves at each time period. The observer hears a wavelength of
.
Using the fact that the wavelength is equal to the speed times the period, and the period is the inverse of the
frequency, we can derive the observed frequency:
As the source moves away from the observer, the observed frequency is lower than the source frequency.
Now consider a source moving at a constant velocity moving toward a stationary observer Y , also shown in
Figure 17.32. The wavelength is observed by Yas Once again, using the fact that the
wavelength is equal to the speed times the period, and the period is the inverse of the frequency, we can derive the
observed frequency:
When a source is moving and the observer is stationary, the observed frequency is
17.18
where is the frequency observed by the stationary observer, is the frequency produced by the moving source,
v is the speed of sound, is the constant speed of the source, and the top sign is for the source approaching the
observer and the bottom sign is for the source departing from the observer.
What happens if the observer is moving and the source is stationary? If the observer moves toward the stationary
source, the observed frequency is higher than the source frequency. If the observer is moving away from the
stationary source, the observed frequency is lower than the source frequency. Consider observer Xin Figure 17.33
as the observer moves toward a stationary source with a speed . The source emits a tone with a constant
frequency and constant period The observer hears the first wave emitted by the source. If the observer were
Access for free at openstax.org
17.7 • The Doppler Effect 841
stationary, the time for one wavelength of sound to pass should be equal to the period of the source Since the
observer is moving toward the source, the time for one wavelength to pass is less than and is equal to the
observed period At time the observer starts at the beginning of a wavelength and moves
toward the second wavelength as the wavelength moves out from the source. The wavelength is equal to the
distance the observer traveled plus the distance the sound wave traveled until it is met by the observer:
FIGURE 17.33 A stationary source emits a sound wave with a constant frequency , with a constant wavelength moving at the speed of
sound v. Observer Xmoves toward the source with a constant speed , and the figure shows the initial and final position of observer X .
Observer Xobserves a frequency higher than the source frequency. The dotted lines show the position of the waves at . The solid lines
show the position of the waves at .
If the observer is moving away from the source (Figure 17.34), the observed frequency can be found:
FIGURE 17.34 A stationary source emits a sound wave with a constant frequency , with a constant wavelength moving at the speed of
sound v. Observer Ymoves away from the source with a constant speed , and the figure shows initial and final position of the observer Y .
Observer Yobserves a frequency lower than the source frequency. The dotted lines show the position of the waves at . The solid lines
show the position of the waves at .
842 17 • Sound
The equations for an observer moving toward or away from a stationary source can be combined into one equation:
17.19
where is the observed frequency, is the source frequency, is the speed of sound, is the speed of the
observer, the top sign is for the observer approaching the source and the bottom sign is for the observer departing
from the source.
Equation 17.18 and Equation 17.19 can be summarized in one equation (the top sign is for approaching) and is
further illustrated in Table 17.4:
17.20
Doppler shift Stationary
observer
Observer moving towards
source
Observer moving away from
source
Stationary source
Source moving towards
observer
Source moving away from
observer
TABLE 17.4
where observer, is the observed frequency, is the source frequency, is the speed of sound, is the speed of the
is the speed of the source, the top sign is for approaching and the bottom sign is for departing.
INTERACTIVE
The Doppler effect involves motion and a video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21doppler) will help visualize the effects of a
moving observer or source. This video shows a moving source and a stationary observer, and a moving observer and
a stationary source. It also discusses the Doppler effect and its application to light.
EXAMPLE 17.8
(a) What frequencies are observed by a stationary person at the side of the tracks as the train approaches and after
Calculating a Doppler Shift
Suppose a train that has a 150-Hz horn is moving at 35.0 m/s in still air on a day when the speed of sound is 340 m/
s.
it passes?
(b) What frequency is observed by the train’s engineer traveling on the train?
Strategy
To find the observed frequency in (a), we must use because the source is moving. The minus sign
is used for the approaching train, and the plus sign for the receding train. In (b), there are two Doppler shifts—one
for a moving source and the other for a moving observer.
Access for free at openstax.org
17.7 • The Doppler Effect 843
Solution
a. Enter known values into
Calculate the frequency observed by a stationary person as the train approaches:
Use the same equation with the plus sign to find the frequency heard by a stationary person as the train
recedes:
Calculate the second frequency:
b. Identify knowns:
◦ It seems reasonable that the engineer would receive the same frequency as emitted by the horn, because
the relative velocity between them is zero.
◦ Relative to the medium (air), the speeds are
◦ The first Doppler shift is for the moving observer; the second is for the moving source.
Use the following equation:
The quantity in the square brackets is the Doppler-shifted frequency due to a moving observer. The factor on
the right is the effect of the moving source.
Because the train engineer is moving in the direction toward the horn, we must use the plus sign for
however, because the horn is also moving in the direction away from the engineer, we also use the plus sign
for But the train is carrying both the engineer and the horn at the same velocity, so As a result,
everything but cancels, yielding
Significance
For the case where the source and the observer are not moving together, the numbers calculated are valid when the
source (in this case, the train) is far enough away that the motion is nearly along the line joining source and observer.
In both cases, the shift is significant and easily noticed. Note that the shift is 17.0 Hz for motion toward and 14.0 Hz
for motion away. The shifts are not symmetric.
For the engineer riding in the train, we may expect that there is no change in frequency because the source and
observer move together. This matches your experience. For example, there is no Doppler shift in the frequency of
conversations between driver and passenger on a motorcycle. People talking when a wind moves the air between
them also observe no Doppler shift in their conversation. The crucial point is that source and observer are not
moving relative to each other.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING 17.9
Describe a situation in your life when you might rely on the Doppler shift to help you either while driving a car or
walking near traffic.
The Doppler effect and the Doppler shift have many important applications in science and engineering. For example,
the Doppler shift in ultrasound can be used to measure blood velocity, and police use the Doppler shift in radar (a
microwave) to measure car velocities. In meteorology, the Doppler shift is used to track the motion of storm clouds;
844 17 • Sound
such “Doppler Radar” can give the velocity and direction of rain or snow in weather fronts. In astronomy, we can
examine the light emitted from distant galaxies and determine their speed relative to ours. As galaxies move away
from us, their light is shifted to a lower frequency, and so to a longer wavelength—the so-called red shift. Such
information from galaxies far, far away has allowed us to estimate the age of the universe (from the Big Bang) as
about 14 billion years.
17.8 Shock Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the mechanism behind sonic booms
• Describe the difference between sonic booms and shock waves
• Describe a bow wake
When discussing the Doppler effect of a moving source and a stationary observer, the only cases we considered
were cases where the source was moving at speeds that were less than the speed of sound. Recall that the
observed frequency for a moving source approaching a stationary observer is As the source
approaches the speed of sound, the observed frequency increases. According to the equation, if the source moves
at the speed of sound, the denominator is equal to zero, implying the observed frequency is infinite. If the source
moves at speeds greater than the speed of sound, the observed frequency is negative.
What could this mean? What happens when a source approaches the speed of sound? It was once argued by some
scientists that such a large pressure wave would result from the constructive interference of the sound waves, that it
would be impossible for a plane to exceed the speed of sound because the pressures would be great enough to
destroy the airplane. But now planes routinely fly faster than the speed of sound. On July 28, 1976, Captain Eldon
W. Joersz and Major George T. Morgan flew a Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird #61-7958 at 3529.60 km/h (2193.20 mi/
h), which is Mach 2.85. The Mach number is the speed of the source divided by the speed of sound:
17.21
You will see that interesting phenomena occur when a source approaches and exceeds the speed of sound.
Doppler Effect and High Velocity
What happens to the sound produced by a moving source, such as a jet airplane, that approaches or even exceeds
the speed of sound? The answer to this question applies not only to sound but to all other waves as well. Suppose a
jet plane is coming nearly straight at you, emitting a sound of frequency The great